STARTED WELCOME TO THE
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 16TH TWO
THOUSAND TWENTY FIVE ELECTRONIC
MEETING OF THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT IT SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING.
A PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ZOOME ONLY TO
SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE A.M. MEETING ID NUMBER
NINE THREE FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT
FIVE TWO NINE ZERO SEVEN OR
JOIN VIA THE ZOMBO.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA IN THE PUBLIC NOTICE A
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
THE BROADCAST OF US MEETING
QUIéN XRF NOT A PROBLEM
EXPERIENCING A LITTLE BIT
OF TECHNICAL DIFFICULTIES JUST
BEAR WITH ME FOR A SECOND WHILE
I CAN DO THAT
.
COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN CAN YOU
PLEASE SAY HERE AND FROM WHERE
YOU'RE CALLING IN FROM HERE ANN
ARBOR.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
BRODEN.
YEAH FERMENTABLE COMMISSIONER
CONWAY HERE FOR ME AND OUR
COMMISSIONER FLEW ALONG HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR, COMMISSIONER
FOR THE MARQUEE HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR, COMMISSIONER HOOK HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR, COMMISSIONER
JAKOBSON, COMMISSIONER AKELA OR
FROM ANOTHER THANK YOU
COMMISSIONER LEE ER FROM ANN
ARBOR.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
CARPENTER ER FROM SUPERIOR
TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONER XIKAR
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON GAVE
PREVIOUS NOTICE THAT HE WILL
NOT BE ABLE TO JOIN AND NUCLEO
I'M JOINING FROM NORTHPORT
TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONER MARGOLIS
ACTING COMMANDER MIKE SCHERBA
COMMISSIONER SUPERCAR
.
ALL RIGHT SO THAT COMPLETES THE
ROLL CALL.
I THINK WE DO HAVE QUORUM.
YEAH WELL I THINK YOU THERE ARE
TWO ITEMS ON TONIGHT'S AGENDA
APPROVAL OF THE AGENDA AND
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES FROM
THE MARCH MEETING.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA SEEING NONE
OF THOSE IN FAVOR OR IS THERE A
MOTION TO APPROVE THE CONSENT
AGENDA FOR SECONDED BY LARRY
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PLEASE SAY
YES OR RAISE YOUR HAND.
YES, ALL THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE
SAY NO.
RAISE YOUR HAND YOU CONSENT
AGENDA IS APPROVED OR WORK ON
THE OH YES.
>> SORRY CHRIS.
SORRY TO INTERRUPT.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE IT KNOWN
THAT COMMISSIONER CAMPAIGN IS
HERE IN THE MEETING.
>> THANK YOU.
HELLO.
ALL RIGHT, LET'S SEE PUBLIC
COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PEOPLE TO SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL TO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND ENTER
MEETING AND NUMBER NINE THREE
FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO
NINE ZERO SEVEN OR CONNECT THEM
AS DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA CITY
STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS THAT
HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND ONE BY
ONE USING THE LAST THREE
DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR THE
PERSON YOU MIGHT NEED IN ORDER
TO ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR
HAND TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK, PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE
ON YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE
RAISED HAND BUTTON AND YOU'LL
HEAR AN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT
THAT THE HOST IS ALLOWING YOU
TO SPEAK WHEN SPEAKING.
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA ANY
BACKGROUND OR TELEVISION NOISE
SO THAT WE CAN HEAR YOU CLEARLY
FIRST.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WHO WISH TO
SPEAK?
YES, I AM SEEING ONE RACE TEN
KATHY GRISWOLD YOU'LL BE GIVEN
THREE MINUTES WITH A THIRTY
SECOND HEADS UP WHEN IT COMES
UP YOUR TIME STARTS THE WOMAN
YOU TALK TO CLOSE YOUR
HELLO
THIS IS KATHY GRISWOLD.
I HAVE A WRITTEN COMMUNICATION
THAT IN YOUR MISSION PACKET I'M
NOT GOING TO REPEAT THAT ONLY
TO SAY THAT I HAVE BEEN WORKING
WITH STATE OFFICIALS REGARDING
THE CONCEPT OF LINE OF SIGHT
OBSTRUCTIONS.
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT IS THE
ENGINEERING STANDARD BUT IT'S
NOT IN THE MICHIGAN VEHICLE
CODE AT THE STATE LEVEL THERE
IS INTEREST IN INCLUDING IT IN
THE MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE .
SO THERE IS NO QUESTION ABOUT
IT REGARDING MILLER ROAD
PROJECT THE WAY IT IS DESIGNED
IT CREATES 90 PLUS BLIND SPOTS
.
SO THAT IS MY MAIN ISSUE.
I'LL SKIP THAT FOR NOW.
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF OTHER
ISSUES RELATED TO PUBLIC RIGHT
OF WAY AND LINE OF SIGHT
OBSTRUCTIONS.
ONE IS THAT FENCES HAVE BEEN
CONSTRUCTED IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT
OF WAY IN MANY NEW BUILDINGS
BECAUSE THE CITY IS NOT IN
FORCE IN THAT SENSE TO BE PUT
ON PRIVATE PROPERTY THAT HAS A
NEGATIVE IMPACT ON PEDESTRIANS
AND ESPECIALLY ON PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES OR THE VANGUARD
HOTEL THAT'S ON GLEN STREET HAS
SOMETHING CALLED INDIRECT EDGE
THAT HAS MANY SHARP OBJECTS
ALONG THE SIDE OF ITS SHARP
EDGES THAT CAN POSE A RISK TO
THE AND TO RUNNERS BABIES IN
STROLLERS AND AGAIN PERSONS
WITH DISABILITIES AND THAT
NEEDS TO BE ADDRESSED.
THIRTY FIVE HUNDRED WASHTENAW
IS A LACK OF A CURB.
IT'S A CURB WITH I KNOW EXACTLY
WHAT YOU CALL IT BUT ANYWAY
CARS REPEATEDLY SHOW ALL THE
WAY UP TO THE PLANTERS SO
THEY'RE PARKING ON THE SIDEWALK
AND I DON'T EVEN THINK THEY'RE
AWARE OF IT.
SO MY REQUEST IS THAT WE LOOK
AT CURB THE SIDEWALKS IN
DETERMINING WHERE THEY ARE
APPROPRIATE CONSTRUCTION SITES
SOMEONE NEEDS TO BE OVERSEEING
THOSE.
I KNOW THAT THERE WAS A
PROPOSAL BY STAFF TO PUT THAT
IN THE BUDGET.
IT WAS NOT APPROVED BY COUNCIL
.
IT CONTINUES TO BE A PROBLEM.
LASTLY, OUR RESPONSE ON PACARD
THE SIDEWALK IS NOW FIVE FEET
WIDE AT THE INTERSECTION.
>> THAT'S ALL.
THANK YOU.
I AT THIS TIME I'M NOT SEEING
ANY RAISED HANDS.
I BELIEVE WE ARE GOOD TO MOVE
FORWARD.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR TO THE MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC FOR THIS
STATEMENT AND THANK YOU FOR
THOSE WHO FORWARDED EMAILS TO
OUR ATTENTION.
THERE ARE I BELIEVE THREE EMAIL
MESSAGES INCLUDED IN THE
PACKET.
SO AS ALWAYS, TAKE A LOOK AT
THOSE MOVING ON TO THE BUSINESS
SECTION FIRST FIRST ITEM IS THE
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY TWENTY SIX
POLICY AGENDA.
EVERY YEAR WE PASS ALONG POLICY
AND LEGISLATURE SUGGESTIONS TO
THE CITY COUNCIL POLICY AGENDA
COMMITTEE CONCERNING LOCAL AND
STATE ISSUES.
WE REVIEWED THIS OVER THE PAST
FEW MONTHS AND THE LATEST DRAFT
DOCUMENT IS AGAIN IN THE
MEETING PACKET AND SO
COMMISSIONERS HAVE ANY OTHER
SUGGESTIONS DISCUSS AND EDIT ON
THE FLY BEFORE VOTING ON THE
DOCUMENT LATER THIS EVENING.
DID THIS INCLUDE THE THE
EMAILED SUGGESTIONS?
>> LOOK, I THINK IT DOES RIGHT.
SO DO WE WANT TO SHARE THAT AND
JUST LET PEOPLE HAVE ONE OR
LOOK AT IT THEN?
YES, I'M SHARING THE SCREEN AND
WE NEED TO INCLUDE THE
SUGGESTIONS FROM THE EMAIL
COMMUNICATION.
>> I THINK RACHEL BY PRESENTING
THOSE EIGHT SO WE LOOKED AT
THIS AT LEAST IN MARCH MAYBE IN
FEBRUARY ALSO I THINK WE DID
STATE ONE MONTH AND LOCAL THE
OTHER MONTH.
BUT ANYWAY YOU CAN POINT OUT
SOME OF THE ADDITIONS AND
DELETIONS BUT I GUESS NOW IS
OUR CHANCE FOR PEOPLE TO HAVE
ANY COMMENTS ON THIS BEFORE WE
VOTE A LITTLE BIT LATER.
>> YOU SO THIS IS THE WORD
DOCUMENT WE'RE TRACKING THE
CHANGES MINOR MODIFICATION HERE
REGARDING M DIED FROM VISION
ZERO TWO TOWARDS ZERO DEATH AND
THIS IS A COMMENT THAT WE
RECEIVED THAT THIS YEAR.
SO IT'S ABOUT WEIGHT BASED VMT
VS US IN REGARDS TO BUB'S THAT
PAIN INTO THE GAS TAX.
I THINK.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THE NEXT ONE IS RELATED TO THE
SO THE TOWARDS ZERO DEATH
POLICIES.
I MEAN THAT'S NOT IT'S A
PHRASEOLOGY THAT I'VE HEARD
BEFORE.
WHERE DID THAT COME FROM?
>> UM, IT'S IT'S COMING FROM
THAT AS TO THE PROGRAM THAT
THEY HAVE IN PLACE SO
OK.
>> ALL RIGHT OK THE NEXT EDIT
IS RELATED TO THE RECENT SHIFT
IN ADMINISTRATION AND SOME
HURDLES THAT THE CITY HAS
EXPERIENCED IN FEDERAL FUNDING
AND UNCERTAINTY AN INCREASING
UNCERTAINTY IN THOSE WE HAVE
YOU SHOULD STOP QUOTE WORK
ORDER TO PASS THE WHILE THE
SAFE STREET FOR ALL FUNDED
PROJECT.
>> SO THIS CHANGE BEING
HIGHLIGHTED ON THE SCREEN IS
TOWARD THAT NEW TREND.
>> THE NEXT UPDATE IS MINOR
CHANGE REGARDING THE THE NEW
VERSION OF THE MUKI AND THE THE
MICHIGAN VERSION OF THE NEW
AMILCAR WHICH IS IN THE WORK
SPAN THAT A NEXT ONE IS A
SLIGHT UPDATE ABOUT AUTOMATED
SPEED MANAGEMENT SYSTEM WHETHER
THAT'S ALLOWED OR NOT.
IN MICHIGAN THERE WAS
LEGISLATOR PASSED IN TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR AND SO FAR TO THAT
KNOWLEDGE THIS KIND OF SYSTEM
IS BEING ALLOWED IN WORKING
ZONE AREAS ONLY AND EXISTS ONLY
ON STATE TRUNK LINES OR RIGHT
AND WE HAVE ADDITIONS HERE NEXT
TO TALK ABOUT THE CONSIDERATION
OF EQUITY IMPLICATIONS
OF TRANSPORTATION AGENCIES
ACCESSING OTHER SOURCES
OF REVENUE BEYOND THE PROPERTY
TAX
AND THIS ONE'S TALKING
ABOUT RECOMMENDATION AND FOR IF
THERE IS A RECOMMENDATION FOR
INCREASING REVENUE FROM TOLLS,
TOLLS SHOULD BE DESIGNED IN A
WAY THAT MAKES THEM MORE
EQUITABLE FOR LOW INCOME AND
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS SUCH AS
THROUGH WITH DISCOUNTS OR
EXEMPTIONS THAT THANK YOU MR.
CHAIR.
I DO HAVE SOME QUESTIONS AND
THESE TWO EDITS ARE GOOD
EXAMPLES OF SOME OF THE TRACK
CHANGED THINGS THAT HAVE BEEN
ADDED TO THIS IF THEY FEEL MORE
LIKE EDITORIAL COMMENTS THAN
THEY DO SPECIFIC ADVOCACY
POINTS AND YOU KNOW, THESE ARE
THESE ARE GOOD EXAMPLES LIKE I
THINK WE CAN ALL SEE THE EQUITY
LOGIC ON DISPLAY HERE BUT I
GUESS KIND MAKES ME WONDER
WHAT'S THE POINT OF THIS
DOCUMENT?
IS IT TO ITEMIZE EVERY
CONSIDERATION SHOULD BE DONE OR
IS IT TO SIMPLY TELL CITY
COUNCIL WHAT THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION SUGGESTS THEY
ADVOCATE FOR AT A STATE OR
OTHER LEVEL AND IS JUST SORT
OF A QUESTION ABOUT THE PURPOSE
OF THE APPRAISAL?
>> YEAH, I I THINK THAT'S A
HELPFUL COMMENT MATT BECAUSE I
DID LIKE SOME OF THE ADDITIONS
ARE THINGS THAT I SENT OVER
EMAIL BUT I'M NOT SURE THAT I
WOULD HAVE PHRASED THEM IN THIS
WAY AND TO PUT THEM DIRECTLY
INTO THE DOCUMENT.
SO THAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN
ACTUALLY JUST A
MISCOMMUNICATION BETWEEN ME AND
LUKE
.
SO YEAH, I MEAN I'M HAPPY TO
SORT OF TAKE TAKE A PASS AT
REWRITING SOME OF THIS IN A WAY
THAT MIGHT FIT THE PURPOSE
OF THE DOCUMENT BETTER OR YOU
KNOW, TO TO REVIEW.
YEAH.
SOME SOME DIFFERENT PHRASING.
SO YEAH.
I MEAN I THINK THE EQUITY
CONSIDERATIONS ARE IMPORTANT
BUT I WOULDN'T NECESSARILY PUT
IN THE SENTENCE ABOUT YOU KNOW
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT THAT WE
STILL GET REVENUE FOR
TRANSPORTATION AND TRANSIT
AGENCIES FROM PROPERTY TAXES.
THAT'S LIKE YOU KNOW THAT'S
PART OF THE POINT.
BUT OTHER SOURCES OF REVENUE
CERTAINLY CAN AND SHOULD BE
CONSIDERED BUT THEY SHOULD BE
CONSIDERED WITH AN EQUITY LENS
AND SO YEAH, THAT LAST SENTENCE
WAS REALLY MORE FOR OUR
INTERNAL DISCUSSION ABOUT HOW
WE PHRASE THAT RECOMMENDATION.
>> DOES THAT KIND OF ALIGN WITH
WHAT YOU WERE WONDERING ABOUT?
YEAH, I WAS JUST THINKING THE
FIRST BULLET, YOU KNOW, MAYBE
COULD CAPTURE YOUR STUFF JUST
BY READING ALOUD TRANSPORTATION
AND TRANSIT AGENCIES ACCESS TO
OTHER SOURCES, EQUITABLE
REVENUES AND LEAVE IT AT THAT
BECAUSE THE DETAILS YOU KNOW,
IT'S NOT LIKE CITY COUNCIL I
IMAGINE WOULD BE IN A POSITION
TO AUTHORIZE THE SPECIFICS
OF THIS.
THEY'RE JUST CARRYING A MESSAGE
PRESUMABLY TO THE STATE
LEGISLATURE.
SO THAT MIGHT BE A OF GETTING
THAT IN THERE WITHOUT ADDING A
LOT OF ADDITIONAL TEXT.
>> YEAH, I THINK THAT MAKES
SENSE AND I WOULD JUST LIKE
MAYBE INSTEAD BEYOND PROPERTY
TAX WE COULD JUST SAY IN
ADDITION TO PROPERTY TAX AND
THEN WHEN YOU KNOW, WHEN
ASSESSING THE YOU KNOW, WHETHER
TO USE OTHER REVENUES TO
CONSIDER, YOU KNOW, THE THE
EQUITY IMPLICATIONS OF THOSE
REVENUE SOURCES AND THAT COULD
BE YEAH.
IT'S THE SAME THING WHERE TOLLS
YEAH.
>> IT'S BEEN FOR THE RECORD I
DON'T DISAGREE WITH ANY OF THE
LOGIC.
>> YEAH WELL I MEAN EVEN IF YOU
DID I THINK IT'S YEAH I AGREE
THAT IT DOESN'T QUITE FIT THE
WAY IT'S WRITTEN IN A IN A
POLICY OBJECTIVE
I WOULD TEND
TO ADD IT ON THE FLY IF THERE'S
ANY CHANGES ANY CERTAIN WAYS
YOU WANT TO SEE IT JUST YES.
SPEAK UP CONSIDER
THOSE THAT
ADDRESS THE THE COMMENT I THINK
I THINK INSTEAD OF BEYOND IF WE
COULD SAY IN ADDITION TO
PROPERTY TAXES I THINK WE DO
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
STILL ADVOCATING FOR PROPERTY
TAXES TO SUPPORT TRANSPORTATION
UN AGENCIES
.
>> SO WITH THIS WOULD WE GET
RID OF THE ORIGINAL SENTENCE
ENTIRELY AND JUST KEEP THE
CONSIDER LOWERING?
>> YEAH, I THAT WOULD BE MY
RECOMMENDATION TO ADD.
>> I MEAN WE CAN I WOULD
ACTUALLY BE COMFORTABLE
INCLUDING ROAD PRICING AND
VEHICLE REGISTRATION AND THEN
LIKE ADDING A PHRASE THAT SAYS
UNTO ASSESS YOU KNOW, ANY
CHANGES IN REVENUE ALLOCATIONS
THROUGH AN EQUITY LENS OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
DERMO KIND OF OVER MY TWO SONS
JUST IN TERMS OF HOW I
UNDERSTAND THIS MAKES ITS WAY
INTO WHAT'S BECOME ADVOCATES
FOR THROUGH ITS LOBBYISTS.
I WOULD SAY WE SHOULD BE MAKING
AN AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENT ABOUT
WHAT POLICIES THEY WANT TO WORK
TO PROMOTE WITH OUR LEGISLATORS
.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, I WOULD GET RID
OF CONSIDER I MEAN THIS IS A
BODY THAT'S CONSIDERING SO IF
WE FEEL THAT IT SHOULD GO IN,
SHOULD GO IN AND WE SHOULD
STATE IT AFFIRMATIVELY, YOU
KNOW, ALLOW TRANSPORTATION
AGENCIES TO AND THAT WOULD BE
MY FEEDBACK AND ALSO I WOULD
SAY, YOU KNOW, SIMILAR TO WHAT
MR. CARPENTER MENTIONED, THE
HOUSE MAY BE GETTING TOO FAR
AHEAD OF OURSELVES.
SO I APPRECIATE THE EQUITY
CONCERNS WE MIGHT THINK ABOUT,
YOU KNOW, WHAT FORMULATIONS DO
WE NEED TO CREATE AS WE STATE
THESE POLICY PRIORITIES THAT
THAT THINK THROUGH THE EQUITY
ISSUES?
I GUESS THAT'S WHAT I WOULD SAY
IS I THINK THAT'S KIND OF MIGHT
BE MORE ON US IF WE THINK A
PARTICULAR SCHEME IS MORE
REGRESSIVE THAN PROGRESSIVE
FOCUSING ON THAT BECAUSE I JUST
THINK THAT'S TOO VAGUE TO SAY
LOOK AT IT THROUGH AN EQUITY
LENS PROBABLY NOT THE MOST
HELPFUL
.
SO WE HAVE DO WE THINK WE HAVE
ENOUGH TIME TO EDIT US AND WHAT
BETWEEN DHARMA AND RACHEL MATT,
ARE THERE CHANGES TO WHAT YOU
SEE?
HOW DO WE WANT TO REWARD WHAT
WE SEE ON THE SCREEN HERE
?
HONESTLY LOOKING AT A LOT
OF THE TEXT THAT WAS ADDED, I
THINK IT ADDS CONTEXT AND SORT
OF OPINION TO THINGS BUT TO THE
COUNCILMAN'S COUNCIL WOMAN'S
POINT IT DOES MAKE IT KIND
OF HARD FOR AN ADVOCATE WALKING
THE HALLS IN LANSING TO SAY
SPECIFICALLY WHAT ANN ARBOR IS
ASKING FOR
.
IT MADE A LOT OF THE EDITS MAY
DETRACT.
THEY'RE GOOD GOOD IMPULSES BUT
I THINK SHE'S RIGHT AND MAYBE
IF WE NEED TO DISCUSS MORE AT
THIS LEVEL SPECIFICALLY WHAT
THE PARAMETERS ARE OF THESE
ITEMS, WE SHOULD DO THAT.
BUT WE WE SHOULDN'T SEND IT TO
COUNCIL BEING VAGUE OR WISHY
WASHY BECAUSE THEY CAN'T DO
MUCH WITH THAT.
SO ONE THING THAT WE COULD DO
IS ACTUALLY COMBINE THIS THE
REVENUE POINT WITH THE WEIGHT
BASED EMPTY BULLET BECAUSE LIKE
TO ME THAT'S ACTUALLY STRONGER
AS AN ADVOCACY MESSAGE WE CAN
SAY ALLOW TRANSPORTATION
AGENCIES ACCESS TO OTHER
SOURCES OF REVENUE IN ADDITION
TO PROPERTY TAXES SUCH AS
WEIGHT BASED VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED FEES AND THEN WE CAN
ADD IN ADDITIONAL SENTENCE THAT
SAYS, YOU KNOW, CONSIDER OR
LIKE ENCOURAGING THE STATE TO
IMPLEMENT VMT PILOT AS MANY
OTHER STATES HAVE DONE.
YEAH, THANK YOU.
CERTAINLY SOUNDS LIKE WE
PROBABLY NEED MORE TIME TO GO
MAYBE ANOTHER PASS THROUGH
OF THE DOCUMENT AND MAYBE EVEN
MORE PREPARATION BEFORE HEADING
INTO THE DISCUSSION TAKING TO
THE COMMENTS FROM MATT TO
BECAUSE THAT'S A GENERAL
DIRECTION THAT'S VERY HELPFUL
TO TO REVISE THAT THE THE
DOCUMENT AND LOOKING AT OUR
WHOLE WORK PLAN FOR THE YEAR
THERE'S REALLY NOT AN URGENCY
TO PASS THIS ONE TODAY SO WE
COULD TAKE THE TIME AS AN
OPTION.
YEAH, THAT'S REASONABLE.
I MEAN IT'S IT'S REALLY THE
NEXT YEAR IS DO KIND OF IN THE
FALL RIGHT.
SO WE ALREADY MISSED THE
OPPORTUNITY FOR THIS YEAR AS I
UNDERSTAND IT.
SO WE'RE WORKING TOWARDS THE
NEXT YEAR'S VERSION ANYWAY
DERMO YEAH.
>> MY OTHER PIECE OF FEEDBACK
WOULD BE THE WAY THAT I
UNDERSTAND IT DOESN'T JUST
ARRIVE THIS DOESN'T JUST GO TO
CITY COUNCIL AND THEN GET
SIGNED OFF ON AND THEN MAKE ITS
WAY TO OUR PRIORITY.
WHAT HAPPENS IS IT GOES TO THE
POLICY COMMITTEE THEY HAMMER
THROUGH, THEY CREATE OUR
OVERALL PRIORITY POLICIES SORRY
POLICY PRIORITIES DOCUMENT AND
CITY COUNCIL VOTES ON THAT TO
APPROVE IT AND SO IT'S NOT
GOING TO BE EVERYTHING.
AND SO I WOULD ALSO SAY THAT
LIKE IN SOME WAYS LESS MIGHT BE
MORE IF YOU TRY TO LIKE IT.
WELL IF I WAS GETTING THIS IS
THE POLICY COMMITTEE I WOULD
SEE A LIST.
I MEAN THIS IS QUITE A LONG
LIST.
I THINK I WOULD STRUGGLE TO
WONDER MAYBE WHAT ARE THE MOST
IMPORTANT THINGS.
AND SO I THINK OF THIS BODY AS
A REALLY STRONG FEELING ABOUT
SOME OF THEM OVER OTHERS WE
MIGHT EVEN THINK ABOUT LOSING
SOME YOU KNOW, I DON'T KNOW.
I'M JUST TRYING TO THINK
OF WAYS THAT WE CAN STRUCTURE
THIS TO HAVE MAXIMAL VISIBILITY
ON THE THINGS THAT WE THINK ARE
OF HIGHEST PRIORITY RACHEL?
YEAH, THAT'S REALLY HELPFUL.
CONTEXT WOULD END AND YOU KNOW
,EVERYONE KNOWS I'M NEW HERE.
SO IS THERE LIKE A NUMBER
OF POLICY ITEMS FOR
TRANSPORTATION THAT GENERALLY
HAVE MADE IT ONTO THAT FINAL
LIST?
>> IF I HAD TO GUESS OFF THE
TOP OF MY HEAD I THINK THERE
WERE MAYBE LIKE TWO THAT TOUCH
THEM IN THE LAST ONE THAT WE
APPROVED.
I CAN I CAN GIVE YOU AN ANSWER
BUT AS YOU MIGHT IMAGINE IN A
CITY QUITE A FEW THINGS THAT
WE'RE TOGETHER WE'RE EVERYTHING
FROM BUILDING BUILDING
CODE CHANGES AND THINGS.
BUT I THINK YEAH, THERE'S A
COUPLE THAT I CAN I CAN SHARE
AROUND THE ONE THAT WE LAST
SIGNED OFF ON SOMETHING YOU
GUYS CAN HAVE SOME CONTEXT INTO
WHAT CITY COUNCIL ACTUALLY
APPROVES.
YEAH, I MEAN I DO THINK THERE'S
A LOT OF VALUE IN US CREATING
THE FULL LIST BUT YEAH IF WE
WANT TO BE EFFECTIVE WE'LL
CERTAINLY NEED TO PRIORITIZE IT
IN A WAY THAT ALIGNS WITH LIKE
THE VOLUME
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT
ARE ULTIMATELY GOING TO GET
INTEGRATED OR WELL IT SOUNDS
LIKE I THINK WE NEED TO TAKE
ANOTHER PASS THROUGH THIS SO WE
TYPICALLY THE LAST FEW YEARS
WE'VE JUST BEEN ADDING AND
DELETING FROM THE SAME DOCUMENT
IF WE WANT TO RESTRUCTURE IT TO
PRIORITIZE TO WE DO HAVE AN
UPDATE TO PRIORITIZE OR TO
ACTUALLY DELETE ITEMS OR NOT.
THEY'RE JUST KEEP THAT KIND
OF IN THE SAME STRUCTURE THAT
WE'VE BEEN DOING AS A CITY
COUNCILOR DENHA, WHEN YOU
RECEIVE THIS, DO YOU THINK THE
POLICY COMMITTEE KIND OF THEY
MUST PRIORITIZE ON THEIR OWN?
>> WOULD THEY APPRECIATE US
PRIORITIZING THINGS OR I DON'T
KNOW.
>> I THINK THEY MIGHT
APPRECIATE KNOWING WHAT RISES
TO THE TOP YOU KNOW, NOT
NECESSARILY A ONE, TWO, THREE,
FOUR OR FIVE, SIX, SEVEN,
EIGHT, NINE, TEN.
BUT IF THERE'S LIKE A YOU KNOW
,TOP AND ON THE REST OF THE
THINGS I'M JUST I CAN'T
REMEMBER WHO ALL SITS ON THE
POLICY COMMITTEE ANYMORE BUT
THEY'RE GETTING THESE FROM ALL
OF THESE DIFFERENT COMMITTEES
AND SO I'M JUST THINKING LIKE
EVEN JUST KIND OF WADING
THROUGH THEM AND UNDERSTANDING
WHAT THEY ARE COULD BE A
CHALLENGE.
SO I CAN'T REMEMBER HOW LONG
THIS SEEMS LIKE IT MIGHT BE
SLIGHTLY LONGER THAN USUAL BUT
MAYBE I'M MISREMEMBERING WHAT
WE'VE HANDED IN THE PAST KNOW.
RIGHT.
WELL, WE'LL TAKE ANOTHER SWING
THROUGH THIS.
I WOULD ENCOURAGE EVERYONE TO
TAKE A LOOK AND IF THERE ARE
THERE ARE SPECIFIC ITEMS THAT
YOU THINK SHOULD BE PRIORITIZED
AT A HIGHER LEVEL, YOU KNOW,
TRY TO HAVE OR TRY TO MAYBE
IDENTIFY A HANDFUL OF THEM THEN
THAT WOULD PROBABLY PLEASE
COMMUNICATE THAT TO US AND WE
CAN KIND OF RESTRUCTURE THIS
RACHEL.
>> YEAH, JUST IN TERMS OF THE
PROCESS FOR REVISING THE
DOCUMENT THAT THE COMMITTEE
OF WORK ON DOCUMENT
COLLABORATIVELY OR IS IT REALLY
JUST AND AGAIN EMAIL
COMMUNICATION AND THEN LUKE AND
CHRIS ARE THE ONES WHO EDITED
IT BECAUSE I WONDER IF IT MIGHT
BE HELPFUL IF FOLKS CAN GIVE
THEIR INPUT ON PRIORITY OR EVEN
IDEAS FOR THE RESTRUCTURING IN
AN ASYNCHRONOUS MANNER.
>> YEAH, YEAH I KNOW WE DON'T
HAVE A SUBCOMMITTEE AROUND THIS
.
OBVIOUSLY WE WOULD NEED TO BE
CAREFUL ABOUT REACHING QUORUM.
WE OUGHT TO HAVE A MEETING BUT
WE WE COULD HAVE A MEETING WITH
JUST A COUPLE PEOPLE AT A TIME
THIS KIND OF POWER WOULD HAVE
TO BE FOR A FEW PEOPLE AT A
TIME THEN YOU KNOW WE COULD DO
THAT.
WE'D HAVE TO HAVE A FEW
MEETINGS THOUGH FOR OR YOU
KNOW, I THINK IT'S I THINK IF
IF MEMBERS WANT TO I THINK IT
MIGHT BE EASIER IF IF YOU HAVE
DEALINGS ABOUT WHAT SHOULD BE
PRIORITIZED MAYBE JUST SEND
THOSE TO US AND WE CAN I I'M
THINKING THERE'S PROBABLY A
GOOD AGREEMENT ON A NUMBER
OF THEM.
WE COULD BRING THAT NEXT MONTH
AND SEE HOW IT GOES IF WE DON'T
GET ANY RESPONSES OR IF THERE'S
SOME WILDLY DIFFERENT OPINIONS
ON WHAT SHOULD BE PRIORITIZED
THEN WE NEED TO MAYBE WE'LL
HAVE ANOTHER AGENDA TOPIC JUST
FOR THAT DISCUSSION NEXT MONTH.
>> YEAH, I GUESS LIKE I WOULD
JUST OFFER THAT I THINK THAT
THERE ARE A LOT OF THERE ARE A
LOT OF BULLET POINTS ON HERE
THAT CAN BE GROUPED
THEMATICALLY AND I WONDER IF
THAT MIGHT MAKE IT LOT MAKE IT
EASIER FOR CITY COUNCIL TO SORT
OF SPEED MORE OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS AND BE ABLE TO
CHOOSE WHAT SEEMS MOST LIKELY
TO BE EFFECTIVELY ADVOCATED FOR
IN THE COMING YEAR.
WE FEEL LIKE WE COULD HAVE
SOMETHING AROUND VISION ZERO
AND WE COULD HAVE MULTIPLE
POLICY OPTIONS THAT ARE
PRIORITIZED UNDER THAT
CATEGORY, FOR EXAMPLE AND THEN
WE WOULDN'T HAVE TO NECESSARILY
JUST KIND OF LIKE CHOOSE FROM
AMONG THIS ENTIRE LIST BUT
RATHER LIKE WITHIN EACH THEME
WE COULD HAVE A PRIORITIZED
LIST AND THAT MAY MAKE IT A LOT
CLEARER TO HAVE CHARACTER LIKE
WHAT IS WHAT IS MOST IMPORTANT
OR YEAH, OK.
JUST WONDERING HOW YOU GO ABOUT
THIS WITH LUKE I KNOW.
WELL WHAT DO YOU HAVE A
SUGGESTION FOR.
YEAH I KNOW THAT YOU'RE KIND
OF YOUR OWN THE DOCUMENT YOUR
OWN FILE BUT HOW HOW DO YOU SEE
THIS GOING FORWARD OVER THE
NEXT MONTH OR TWO YEAR STARTING
ONE SUGGESTION I THINK ANOTHER
PIECE OF DOCUMENT MIGHT BE
HELPFUL WOULD BE OUR
COMPREHENSIVE TRANSITION PLAN
AND THAT DOCUMENT DOES HAVE
STRATEGIES HIGHLIGHTED FROM
PAGE TWO.
SO IF WE COULD CORRELATE THESE
ITEMS INTO WHAT WE ALREADY LAID
OUT IN OUR PLAN, THAT'S A WAY
TO ORGANIZE THESE BULLET POINTS
INTO SEVERAL GROUPS AND THAT'S
GOING TO HELP WITH PART HAS
THEY RUN INTO SUBGROUPS OR
PRIORITY GROUPS AND WE CAN
TOTALLY COMBINE BE LOOKING AT
COMBINING CERTAIN ITEMS AFTER
THE THE GROUP PRODUCT
PRIORITIZATION SO JUST AN IDEA
OR SO THAT'S A GOOD WAY TO
PRIORITIZE THINGS.
>> YEAH, I WAS JUST GOING TO
SAY I'M VERY SUPPORTIVE
OF EITHER OF THOSE SUGGESTIONS
TO TO GROUP AND CONSOLIDATE.
I THINK IT'S A LITTLE
OVERWHELMING AND ALSO MAYBE I
DON'T LOOK I DON'T KNOW HOW
THIS CONNECTS IN TO THE TO THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND IF
THAT'S A IF YOU CAN SEE THAT
THAT'S AMAZING.
ANOTHER WAY TO DO IT MIGHT BE
LIKE FOCUSING ON WHO YOU'RE
ADVOCATING TO BECAUSE WE CAN
PROBABLY ONLY ADVOCATE TO M NOT
LIKE A CERTAIN NUMBER
OF THINGS.
SO BUT I THINK THAT'S JUST
ECHOING WHAT WHAT RACHEL SAID
THAT ANY SORT OF CONSOLIDATION
I THINK IS GOING TO REALLY HELP
IN TRANSLATING THIS TO ANY
OTHER AUDIENCE.
DO WOULD YOU BE WILLING TO HAND
THIS DOCUMENT TO I GUESS NUC OR
OR ME OR SOMEBODY ON THE
COMMISSION TO START AGAIN?
>> THESE ARE IT'S YES.
>> THAT'S THAT'S GOING TO BE
HELPFUL.
SO YOU'RE SAYING IF I'M HEARING
CORRECTLY HAD THIS OFF TO YOU
OR RENEGE TO TO CIRCULATE FOR
FOR CHANGES.
YEAH, OK.
I GUESS I'M GETTING A LOOK I
DON'T WANT TO STEAL ANY THUNDER
OR STILL AN ANNOUNCEMENT HERE
BUT YOU KNOW I DO DO YOU WANT
TO MAKE AN ANNOUNCEMENT I GUESS
NOW IT'S A GOOD TIME SUNNY
YEAH.
OH YEAH THANK YOU.
I'LL BE LEAVING THE CITY SOON
LAST DAY BEING THE TWENTY THIRD
EFFECTIVELY AND CYNTHIA
RIGHT-WINGER WILL BE THE NEXT
INTERIM TRANSPORTATION MANAGER
AND SO THAT'S THE TRANSITION
POINT CITY IS ACTIVELY
RECRUITING FOR A PERMANENT
REPLACEMENT AND THAT PROCESS IS
IS ONGOING ACTIVELY SO OK SO
THANKS.
>> YEAH THAT'S THANKS FOR
ANNOUNCING THAT I SORRY TO HEAR
THAT AND FOR MANY REASONS BUT
THIS ONE IN PARTICULAR.
YEAH WELL MAYBE SOMETHING IS
THE RIGHT PERSON TO HAND IT OFF
TO THEN IF SHE'S THE INTERIM
TRANSPORTATION MANAGER.
OK I JUST WANTED TO THAT'S WHAT
I'VE BEEN STRUGGLING HERE A
LITTLE BIT WITH WHERE WE GO
WITH THIS KNOWING THAT YOU WERE
LEAVING SOON SO OK YEAH LET'S
PLAN ON AND HANDING IT OFF TO
SOME SOMETHING LIKE YOUR CHOICE
OR WHATEVER YOU THINK IS RIGHT
CYNTHIA OR NICK AND AND THEN
WE'LL START WORKING FROM THERE
TO KIND OF REORGANIZE THIS.
>> THANK YOU.
I'LL PASS ALONG VIA THE
COMMENTS WE'RE HEARING FROM
THIS MEETING AS WELL.
>> OK, ANY OTHER COMMENTS ON
THIS?
ALL RIGHT.
SO THEN WE WILL NOT BE OK.
WELL, THAT'S THE STATE PORTION
THE LOCAL PORTION.
IS THERE ANYTHING WORTH GOING
THROUGH ON THE LOCAL OR DID WE
ALREADY VOTE ON THAT?
WE HAVE NOT WE REVIEWED THE
STATE AND THE LOCAL SECTION IS
SEPARATELY BUT WE HAVE NOT
TAKEN ACTION EITHER AT ALL.
>> BUT WE ARE ORGANIZING BOTH
OF THEM.
OK, ALL RIGHT.
SO THEN I THINK WE CAN MOVE ON
TO THE INFORMATION AND
DISCUSSION SECTIONS OF THE
MEETING FIRST IS THE FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY TWENTY SIX BUDGET
DISCUSSION EVERY OR WE GET AN
UPDATE FROM THE CITY'S FINANCE
TEAM AT áDER WILL PRESENT THE
UPCOMING BUDGET THAT WILL BE
VOTED BY CITY COUNCIL IN MAY I
BELIEVE AND ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS.
SO ED, DID YOU I THINK YOU
SHOULD BE ABLE TO SHARE LHASA'S
THANK YOU VERY MUCH AND CAN
EVERYONE SEE MY SLIDESHOW
, SEE
WHAT'S GOING ON THERE?
GO ALL RIGHT.
SORRY ABOUT THAT.
>> SET ONE THING UP MIND.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANKS FOR GIVING ME SOME TIME.
MY NAME IS ED.
AS MENTIONED I AM THE FINANCIAL
MANAGER FOR PUBLIC SERVICES AND
I'M GOING TO DO MY BEST TO FILL
THE SHOES MARTIUS HISTORICALLY
DONE TONIGHT YOU WALKING
THROUGH OUR FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
TWENTY SIX PROPOSED BUDGET FOR
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR WITH A
FOCUS ON TRANSPORTATION RELATED
FUNDING PLAN ON KEEPING IT
FAIRLY HIGH LEVEL.
BUT FOR THE SAKE OF TIME BE
HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS
YOU HAVE EITHER NOW OR LATER
LOOKING AT THIS FIRST SLIDE
HERE WE SEE THE CITY'S TOTAL
EXPENDITURE BUDGET BREAKDOWN
THAT ON MONDAY THERE WILL BE
EIGHT.
WE'LL SEE THE PROPOSED BUDGET
OF SIX HUNDRED AND THIRTY NINE
POINT FIVE MILLION DOLLARS
WHICH CONSISTS OF ONE HUNDRED
AND FORTY SIX POINT SEVEN
MILLION DOLLARS A GENERAL FUND
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY FOUR POINT
TWO DOLLARS MILLION IN
ENTERPRISE FUNDS.
NINETY NINE POINT SEVEN DOLLARS
MILLION IN SPECIAL REVENUE
FUNDS, FIFTY FIVE POINT ONE
DOLLARS MILLION IN TRUST FUNDS
AND ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY THREE
POINT EIGHT DOLLARS MILLION IN
THIS OTHER CATEGORY WHICH
INCLUDES THINGS LIKE INTERNAL
SERVICE REVENUE OR INTERNAL
SERVICE FUNDS INCLUDE THINGS
LIKE I.T. AND FLEET THAT
PROVIDE SERVICES INTERNALLY AND
RECEIVE TRANSFERS FROM OTHER
FUNDS AS THEIR REVENUE SOURCE
AND THAT'S DEBT RELATED FUNDS.
SOME COMPONENT UNITS, A LITTLE
BIT OF CAPITAL PROJECTS GOING
INTO THE TRANSPORTATION FOCUSED
FUNDS.
>> THE FIRST ON WE'LL TALK TO
YOU IT'S GOING TO BE THE MAJOR
AND LOCAL STREET FUNDS.
THESE ARE ALSO REFERRED TO
COMMONLY AS PUBLIC ACTIVITY ONE
FUNDS MICHIGAN TRANSPORTATION
FUNDS OR WEIGHT AND GAS TAX.
THESE ARE FUNDS COLLECTED VIA
VEHICLE REGISTRATION AND
GASOLINE TAXES BY THE STATE AND
THEN DISTRIBUTED BASED ON A
FORMULA THAT TAKES INTO ACCOUNT
BOTH KLEENMAID AND POPULATION.
THE FUNDS COME IN IN TWO
SEPARATE CATEGORIES HERE THE
LIGHT BLUE REPRESENTS THE MAJOR
STREET FUNDING.
THE ORANGE REPRESENTS THE LOCAL
STREET FUNDING AND WE YOU KNOW
WE CAN ALWAYS FIND LOCAL STREET
ON LOCAL STREETS AND MAJOR
STREET DOLLARS ON MAJOR STREETS
.
TOTAL REVENUE PROJECTION FROM
THE ACT 51 DISTRIBUTION IS
ABOUT SIXTEEN POINT EIGHT
DOLLARS MILLION IN NY 26.
THIS IS A MODEST INCREASE OVER
CURRENT ESTIMATE OF ROUGHLY 25
ABOUT TWO PERCENT.
IF WE TURN OVER TO THE RIGHT
SIDE OF THE SCREEN OR WE SEE
THE EXPENDITURE ALLOCATION,
YOU'LL SEE A BREAKDOWN OF THE
TWENTY EIGHT POINT TWO MILLION
DOLLAR EXPENDITURE BUDGETED
WHICH IS BROKEN UP INTO A FEW
CATEGORIES.
WE HAVE THE RIGHT OF WAY
MAINTENANCE WHICH SIMPLY IS ANY
WORK BEING DONE WITHIN THE
RIGHT WAY AND INCLUDES THINGS
LIKE POTHOLE FILLING, STREET
SWEEPING SNOW REMOVAL.
ROAD CAPITAL MAINTENANCE ALSO
CONTRIBUTES TO SOME NON
MOTORIZED ACTIVITIES SUCH AS
CROSSWALKS AND BIKE LANES.
IF WE TURN TO THE NEXT LARGEST
CATEGORY THAT ALMOST 5.2
MILLION DOLLARS YOU SEE IN
ORANGE FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL THIS
IS PRIMARILY ANYTHING CONTROLS
TRAFFIC.
WE'RE TALKING VEHICULAR DESTRY
AND SIGNS AND SIGNALS AS WELL
AS THE PAVEMENT MARKINGS WE ALL
SEE ON ROADS KIND OF JUST
FOLLOWING THIS AROUND TO THE
PARK HERE.
THE NEXT CATEGORY HERE THIS
GRAY SECTION REPRESENTS DEBT
SERVICE PAYING BACK SOME LOANS
WE'VE TAKEN IN THE PAST.
THIS YELLOW CHUNK, THIS LITTLE
840000 DOLLAR AREA, OUR
TRANSFERS TO THE ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION FUND WHICH WILL
GET INTO MORE DETAIL ON ON THE
NEXT SLIDE.
AND THEN FINALLY WE HAVE
ANOTHER KIND OF CATCH ALL OTHER
CATEGORY FOR THIS THE SECTION
TWO THAT THAT INCLUDES SOME
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS, THINGS
LIKE THE MUNICIPAL MUNICIPAL
SERVICE CHARGE INSURANCE.
BUT ALSO CARRIES SOME ASSET
MANAGEMENT AND TRAFFIC
ENGINEERING ACTIVITIES MOVING
ON TO ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION FUND IS A SUBSET
OF ACTIVITY ONE FUNDS FROM THE
PREVIOUS SLIDE PER THAT ACT WE
ARE REQUIRED TO SPEND A MINIMUM
ONE PERCENT OF THAT FUNDING ON
ALTERNATE TRANSPORTATION
ACTIVITIES.
THE CITY FAR EXCEEDS THAT
MINIMUM.
YOU CAN SEE THE BREAKDOWN
OF REVENUE AGAIN THIS IS
RESULTING IN TRANSFERS FROM
MAJOR AND LOCAL AND THIS EIGHT
HUNDRED AND FORTY THOUSAND
REFLECTS THAT YELLOW BAR FROM
THE PREVIOUS PIE CHART.
WE DID HAVE SOMEWHAT OF AN
OUTLIER YEAR BACK IN FISCAL
YEAR 2001.
JUST EXPLANATION THERE WAS THAT
WAS PART OF THE ALLEN CREEK
PEDESTRIAN TUNNEL PROJECT.
I GET THAT WRAPPED UP.
WE HAD TO SEND A DECENT AMOUNT
OF EXTRA FUNDS OVER TO THE
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION FUND
AND THAT IF WE LOOK BACK OVER
AGAIN TO THE RIGHT WE SEE OUR
EXPENDITURE ALLOCATION ONCE
AGAIN AND ALL THE WAYS WE'RE
SPENDING THIS YEAR WE HAVE A
ONE POINT ONE MILLION DOLLAR
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION
EXPENDITURE BUDGETED TO DO WANT
TO HIGHLIGHT THAT THIS IS NOT
THE ONLY ATTENTION THAT THE
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION
NETWORK GETS.
THIS WOULD BE FOR VERY SPECIFIC
ACTIVITIES LIKE MAINTENANCE
WITHIN MAYBE A PROTECTED BIKE
LANE THAT REQUIRES SPECIFIC
EQUIPMENT OR IF WE WENT OUT
SPECIFICALLY FOR THAT WHAT A
LOT OF THOSE ASSETS ALSO
BENEFIT FROM FUNDING FROM THE
PREVIOUS SLIDE OUTSIDE OF THAT
TRANSFER WHEN THEY'RE BEING
TORTURED AS PART OF A LARGER
EFFORT.
ONE THING TO HIGHLIGHT ON THIS
SLIDE IS YOU KNOW, THE BIGGEST
CHUNK THIS 400000 PIECE IS PART
OF OUR JUST STARTING UP NORTH
MAIN TRANSPORTATION STUDY.
>> THAT EFFORT IS STARTING NOW
AND AND IT INCLUDES NEEDS
ANALYSIS AND CONCEPTUAL DESIGN
FOR ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION
OPPORTUNITIES.
A LOT OF NORTHMAN FROM HERE ON
TO 14, ANOTHER MAJOR FUNDING
SOURCE THAT TRANSFER THAT FUNDS
TRANSFER STATION ACTIVITIES IS
THE CITY'S STREET BRIDGE AND
SIDEWALK MILEAGE, A
LONGSTANDING VILLAGE YOU CAN
SEE HERE ON THE REVENUE
BREAKDOWN.
WE HAVE A FEW DIFFERENT TYPES
OF REVENUE COMING IN THE LIGHT
BLUE AND ORANGE CHUNKS OF THIS
STACK BAR GRAPH REPRESENT THE
MILEAGE REVENUE NEXT AND MOST
OF THESE YEARS WE SEE A SMALL
GRAY BAR THAT'S GOING TO
REFLECT INVESTMENT REVENUE FROM
FUNDS WE HAVE ON HAND AND
INVEST FOR HISPAN AND THEN UP
HERE WE HAVE THE YELLOW YELLOW
JOINT.
THESE THESE REPRESENT INTERNAL
TRANSFERS.
SO THIS WOULD BE YOU KNOW,
MAYBE THE CASE WE'RE DOING A
RESURFACING PROJECT BUT ALSO
DOING THE WATERMANN AND
POTENTIALLY SOME STORMWATER
WORK AT THE SAME TIME THE
STREET BRIDGE AND SIDEWALK
MILEAGE FUND MAY FUND THE
ENTIRE PROJECT BUT THEN RECEIVE
TRANSFERS BACK FROM THOSE OTHER
FUNDING SOURCES FOR THEIR SHARE
.
YOU KNOW, WE SEE SOME PRETTY
LARGE YEARS RECENTLY SOME
OF THAT HAD TO DO WITH THE ROAD
BONDS THAT WE RECENTLY TOOK ON
WHERE THERE IS SOME CROSS CROSS
FUNDING AND THEN PRIMARILY
UTILITIES CONTRIBUTIONS ON
THOSE PROJECTS THAT ARE
TOUCHING BOTH AND THEN THIS
DARKER BLUE BAR NEAR THE TOP
REPRESENTS CONSTRUCTION
REIMBURSEMENT WHICH IS WHEN WE
PARTNER WITH ENTITIES OUTSIDE
OF THE CITY FOR A PROJECT THAT
HAS MUTUAL BENEFIT.
>> YOU KNOW OUR CONTENT
PARTNERS THERE, THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN AND WASHTENAW
COUNTY, A LOT OF THIS RECENT
ACTIVITY IS RELATED TO THE EAST
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE BRIDGE
PROJECT GOING BACK TO THE
MILLAGE REVENUE FOR A SECOND
BETWEEN THE BLUE AND THE ORANGE
WE ARE ANTICIPATING ABOUT
SIXTEEN POINT SIX DOLLARS
MILLION IN REVENUE TO TO BE
ABLE TO INVEST IN THESE
TRANSPORTATION ACTIVITIES IN
THE MOVING OVER TO OUR
EXPENDITURE BREAKDOWN WE CAN
SEE, YOU KNOW, A LITTLE OVER
HALF OF THE EXPENDITURES ARE
ALLOCATED FOR SOME STREET
RESURFACING.
WE ALSO HAVE SOME OTHER MAJOR
PROJECTS, ONE THAT I WANT TO
HIGHLIGHT IS NEXT BIGGEST CHUNK
OF OUR PROUD OF OUR PIE CHART
THE NIXON ROAD IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT.
SO THIS IS A RECONSTRUCTION
PROJECT AND I LIKE A GOOD
EXAMPLE OF WHAT I WAS TALKING
ABOUT OR MAYBE SOME OF THE THE
ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION ITEMS ARE
THE NON MOTORIZED ITEMS GET
KIND OF LOOPED IN WITH A BIGGER
ACTIVITY.
>> IT IS A RECONSTRUCTION
PROJECT.
THE MAJORITY OF THE DOLLARS ARE
GOING TO RECONSTRUCT THE ROADS
BUT THERE ARE NEW ROUNDABOUTS,
PROTECTED BIKE LANES AND
CROSSWALK AND SIDEWALK
IMPROVEMENTS INCLUDED IN THAT
PROJECT OUTSIDE OF THOSE THREE
SPECIAL REVENUE FUNDS, THERE
ARE ALSO THREE OTHER VILLAGES
THAT FUND TRANSPORTATION
ACTIVITIES CURRENTLY 20 PERCENT
OF THE CITY SHARE OF THE COUNTY
MENTAL HEALTH VILLAGE HAS BEEN
HAS BEEN ALLOCATED FOR
ACTIVITIES RELATED TO
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY INCLUDING
STREET LIGHT REPLACEMENT
CROSSWALK LIGHTING UPGRADES AND
TRAFFIC CALMING.
NEXT UP WE HAVE THE SIDEWALK
CONSTRUCTION VILLAGE THIS IS A
MILLAGE THAT SPECIFICALLY
INSTALLS CROSSWALKS FOR THERE
CURRENTLY AREN'T ANY FILLING
GAPS IN OUR SIDEWALKS SYSTEM
AND IMPROVING THAT NETWORK.
AND THEN LASTLY THE CLIMATE
SOMEWHAT NEW CLIMATE ACTION
KNOWLEDGE CONTRIBUTES HAS
CONTRIBUTED SOME FUNDING
ALREADY TO TRANSPORTATION
RELATED ITEMS.
THERE'S 400000 DOLLARS IN THAT
BUDGET THIS YEAR TO
CONTINUE
SUPPORTING CROSSWALK UPGRADES,
STREET LIGHTING UPGRADES, BIKE
LANE INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> BEFORE WE MOVE ON TO THE
NEXT SLIDE, I WANTED TO AND
THIS IS THE QUESTION FOR DARMA
ABOUT THE COUNTY MENTAL HEALTH
MILEAGE REBATE IS THERE HAD
BEEN DISCUSSION OF CHANGING HOW
THOSE FUNDS ARE APPORTIONED OR
MAYBE SOME MAYBE IT'S NOT THE
TRANSPORTATION PART.
I THOUGHT I HEARD THAT THERE IS
TALK ABOUT OF THAT TOTAL REBATE
MAYBE SOME PARTS OF IT WOULD BE
CHANGED WHERE IT GOES.
>> WE DID YEAH WE DID FOR OUT
OF THE COUNTY WIDE BALLOT
INITIATIVE WE VOTED MAINLY WHAT
HAPPENED WAS THAT THE CLIMATE
ACTION PORTION THERE WAS A
PORTION OF IT THAT WAS FUNDING
OUTSIDE AND NOW THAT WE HAVE
THE TWO ZERO MILEAGE GROWTH
CLIMATE KNOWLEDGE WE REMOVED
THAT PART AND SAME LEVEL
OF FUNDING FOR TRANSPORTATION.
THE I BELIEVE IF I REMEMBER
CORRECTLY THE BALANCE THAT WAS
GOING TO OCI IS NOW GOING TO
FUND UNARMED RESPONSE.
THAT'S RIGHT.
OK, STABLES MY POINT RIGHT.
>> NO CHANGES FOR THIS.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
>> SORRY I'D ALSO LIKE TO ASK A
QUESTION ABOUT THE SLIDE IF YOU
DON'T MIND.
CAN I HAVE SOME HELP
UNDERSTANDING THE IMPACT OF THE
THE SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
KNOWLEDGE ON MAIN STREET?
>> THE MILEAGE IS GOING TO
COVER THE ENTIRE COST OF THE
CONSTRUCTION OF THAT SIDEWALK.
I'M TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHAT
EFFECT THAT THE MILEAGE IS
HAVING ON THAT.
>> LIKE IF WE DIDN'T HAVE IT,
WHAT WOULD THE BREAKDOWN HAVE
BEEN?
WHAT WOULD HAVE BEEN
COVERED OUT OF LIKE THAT
GENERAL FUND AND WHAT WOULD
HAVE BEEN COVERED OUT
OF ASSESSMENTS TO PROPERTY
OWNERS?
IS THERE ANY GUIDANCE ON THAT
THAT COULD HELP ME UNDERSTAND
THE IMPACT OF THIS KNOWLEDGE
THAT I'M NOT SURE I CAN I CAN
LOOK INTO THAT AND GET BACK TO
PROVIDE SOME AN ANSWER, BUT I
WASN'T NECESSARILY EXPECTING
YOU TO KNOW THAT OFF THE TOP
OF YOUR HEAD.
SO IT'S OK IF YOU GO BACK WITH
BUT I DO THINK I DO THINK
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT IS IS
TYPICAL AND IN THOSE SITUATIONS
FOR MUNICIPALITIES THEY DON'T
HAVE SUCH A MODEL.
>> WOW.
YEAH I THINK IT USED TO BE
TYPICAL HERE IF IF YOU HAVE ANY
MORE INFORMATION YOU COULD
SHARE WITH THE COMMUNITY BE
VERY HELPFUL.
THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP WE HAVE SOME SPECIFIC
ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS
AGAIN THESE ARE THESE ARE ONES
THAT ARE VERY CLEARLY ITEMIZE
FOR ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION NOT
MEANT TO BE A COMPREHENSIVE
LIST BUT THESE ARE ACTIVITIES
OR BUDGETED ACTIVITIES WITHIN
WITHIN THE FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY SIX PROPOSED BUDGET I
THINK WE'VE TOUCHED ON THE
MAJORITY OF THEM IN PREVIOUS
SLIDES OR THEY'VE BEEN
HIGHLIGHTED.
BUT I DO WANT TO HIGHLIGHT THE
ROAD RECONFIGURATIONS 211
THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED ELEVEN
THOUSAND PLUS SOME FUNDING
AVAILABLE IN FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
FIVE ARE BEING UTILIZED TO
COMPLETE AN EVALUATION OF MULTI
LANE ROADS FOR POTENTIAL
ROADWAY RECONFIGURATIONS AND
THE PURPOSE OF THOSE OF THOSE
EVALUATIONS ARE TO ANALYZE AND
IDENTIFY OPPORTUNITIES TO
PRIORITIZE ROADWAY SPACE TO
ADVANCE SAFETY LOWER VEHICLE
SPEEDS, IMPROVE TRANSIT
OPERATIONS AND CREATE CONNECTED
COMFORTABLE WALKING AND CYCLING
INFRASTRUCTURE
.
ALL RIGHT.
AND THEN THIS KIND OF CIRCLES
BACK TO MY POINT ON THE STREET
BRIDGE AND SIDEWALK MILEAGE
SLIDE WITH THE NIXON PROJECT.
BUT THERE ARE SEVERAL PROJECTS
THAT KIND OF ON THE SURFACE
LEVEL LOOK LIKE OUR TRADITIONAL
YOU KNOW, SURFACE ROAD SURFACE
TREATMENT PROJECTS BUT THAT
INCLUDE A LOT OF THESE
COMPONENTS CROSSWALKS, BIKE
LANE SPEED MANAGEMENT.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, I WON'T GO
THROUGH ALL OF THEM IN GREAT
DETAIL BUT FOR EXAMPLE IN STATE
STREET STATION IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT INCLUDES PROTECTED BIKE
LANES AND RACE CROSSWALKS
FALLING AND RESURFACING PROJECT
INCORPORATES RAISED CROSSWALK
SPEED TABLES AND IN ALL AGES
AND ABILITIES BIKING FACILITY.
NOW WE JUST KIND OF HAVE SOME
SPATIAL VISUALIZATION
OF PROJECTS THAT HAVE FUNDING
IN THAT FY TWENTY AND WHERE
WHERE THEY ARE THROUGHOUT THE
CITY KIND OF THESE BOULDER
LINES ON ON ROADS OR EVEN DOTS
AND SOME CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE WE
MIGHT BE DOING A ROUNDABOUT OR
SOME TRAFFIC SIMILAR WORK OR
SOMETHING THAT ONLY SHOWS UP IN
A VERY SMALL AREA ARE SPLIT ARE
COLORED BY PLANT CONSTRUCTION
AND SO SOME OF THESE DARK BLUE
AREAS MAY ALREADY BE UNDER
CONSTRUCTION OR JUST ABOUT TO
BE UNDER CONSTRUCTION BUT WE'LL
HAVE NY 26 FUNDING IN A FEW
MONTHS HERE TO GET WRAPPED UP
THE GREEN.
THESE BRIGHT GREEN ONES ARE
PLANNED FOR NEXT CALENDAR YEAR
CONSTRUCTION AND THEN THE
YELLOW AND RED ARE A LITTLE
FURTHER OUT BUT HAVE FUNDING
AND FOIA 26 TO MAYBE GET
STARTED ON DESIGN OR HAVE SOME
FUNDING RELATED TO PURSUING
GRANT OPPORTUNITIES OR
ENGAGEMENT AND THEN THERE'S A
FEW THAT ARE MORE AREA BASED
THAT REPRESENTED BY THE MAGENTA
CHECKERED AND THE SOLID MAGENTA
AREA WOULD REPRESENT THE 2025
SIDEWALK REPAIR PROGRAM AND
LOCAL STREET RESURFACING AREAS
AND THEN KIND OF THE LIME GREEN
CHECKERED AND SOLID AREAS ARE
THE TWENTY TWENTY SIX PROGRAMS
AND A SIMILAR WAY AND THEN WE
CAN'T TALK TRANSPORTATION IN
MICHIGAN WITHOUT TALKING A
LITTLE SNOW.
THE NY 26 BUDGET INCLUDES
FUNDING TO CONTINUE TO INVEST
IN OUR FLEET WITH SOME
EQUIPMENT UPGRADES.
IT ALSO HAS 50000 DOLLARS TO
BEGIN FOCUS COMMUNICATIONS
OUTREACH REGARDING PARKING
DURING SNOW EVENTS IN FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY FIVE THIS CURRENT
FISCAL YEAR IN THE CITY FOR THE
FIRST TIME AT LEAST IN RECENT
MEMORY UTILIZE CONTRACTED
SUPPLEMENTAL SNOW REMOVAL
SUPPORT FOR LOCAL STREETS AND
REFUGE ISLANDS AND THAT FUNDING
IS PLANNED TO CONTINUE IN
FISCAL YEAR SIX.
WHY DID ARE THERE ANY OTHER
QUESTION AND THE OTHER
QUESTIONS RELEVANT COMMENTS AND
OR SO THIS WILL BE VOTED ON BY
COUNCIL AND MAY SO RIGHT FOR
THE FIRST READING IS UPCOMING
ON OK, I'M HAPPY TO SEE A
CONTINUATION OF THE FIVE
THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR CONTRACTOR
BASED SNOW REMOVAL SITE.
I GUESS WE'LL GET TO THAT IN
THE NEXT THE NEXT TOPIC BUT I'M
GLAD THAT IT WENT WELL ENOUGH
THAT WE WANT TO DO IT AGAIN.
ALL RIGHT.
IF THERE ARE NO OTHER QUESTIONS
OR COMMENTS THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR COMING.
AND I WAS LEARNING A LOT EVERY
YEAR WHEN MARTY OR YOU COME BY.
>> SO THANK YOU.
APPRECIATE IT.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP IS THE WINTER
MAINTENANCE UPDATE.
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
REQUESTED A REVIEW OF THE
WINTER MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES
IN PAST YEARS.
SO THIS YEAR THE CITY PUBLIC
WORKS MANAGER PAUL MATTHEWS IS
GOING TO GIVE AN OVERVIEW
OF THE EXPERIENCE THIS PAST
WINTER AND ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS
.
PAUL, THE FLOOR IS YOURS
OK, CAN EVERYBODY SEE MY SCREEN
?
AND YES, I HAD TO CLICK TO
SWITCH TO YOUR SCREEN ALONG THE
TOP SO I'M NOT SURE WHAT
EVERYONE ELSE IS DOING.
>> ARE YOU SEEING A POWERPOINT
COVER PAGE?
OK, GREAT.
YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
JUST GOING TO GO OVER A BUNCH
OF THE CHANGES THAT WE MADE FOR
THE TWENTY TWENTY FOUR TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE IN OUR SEASON.
THIS IS GOING TO INCLUDE AN
UPDATE ON OUR CONTRACTED
SERVICES AND SOME OF THE
ORDINANCE CHANGES IN EQUIPMENT
CHANGES THAT WE MADE THIS YEAR
OVERALL I THINK THIS YEAR WE
HAD A LOT OF POSITIVE FEEDBACK
FROM RESIDENTS AND USERS ALIKE
AND SO WE'RE GOING TO GO OVER
THE NEW CONTRACTED SERVICES.
AS I SAID, THE NEW EQUIPMENT,
THE NEW SNOWPLOWING MAP THAT WE
MADE AND THEN AN ORDINANCE
UPDATE THAT WAS PASSED THIS
PAST WINTER FOR PARKING.
SO THIS WAS THE FIRST YEAR THAT
WE HAD USED OUR CONTRACTED
SERVICES ON THE SIDEWALKS PASS
PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES THAT ARE
ON THIS MAP.
SO EVERYTHING THAT'S EITHER IN
BLUE OR PINK THOSE WERE THE
LOCATIONS THAT WERE CONTRACTED
OUT.
I WOULDN'T SAY IT WAS ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT SUCCESSFUL THIS
YEAR WE HAD A BRAND NEW
CONTRACTOR.
IT WAS A BRAND NEW PROCESS FOR
THE CITY AND YOU KNOW, WE HAD
SOME BUMPS IN THE ROAD JUST
WITH RESPONSE AND TIMING AND
EXPECTATIONS AND THINGS OF THAT
NATURE.
SO AS WE WENT THROUGH THE
WINTER WE CONTINUOUSLY MET WITH
OUR CONTRACTOR AND SENT THEM
PICTURES AND SHOWED PICTURES
AND CAME UP WITH A REALLY GOOD
SOLUTION INSIDE CITY WORKS THAT
IS MAKES THEM KIND
INTERACT
WITH AN APP THAT SAYS WE
COMPLETED
AND WE'LL GET WE GET
UP TO DATE TIME SO AS THIS WENT
THIS WINTER WE DID MAKE A BUNCH
OF CHANGES AND GOT A NEW
PROJECT MANAGER FROM OUR
CONTRACTOR AND I THINK WE ENDED
ON A HIGH NOTE AT THE END
OF THE SEASON.
WE DO INTEND TO EXTEND WITH
THAT CONTRACTOR KNOWING THAT
THERE ARE GROWING PAINS IN THE
FIRST YEAR.
IT'S A BIG CITY AND THIS IS A
LOT OF SCATTERED WORK AND SO WE
DO INTEND TO CONTINUE WITH
THEM.
WE SPEND A TOTAL OF FORTY FOUR
THOUSAND WITH THIS VENDOR TO
COMPLETE REMOVAL OF THAT ALSO
INCLUDED THE DDA RAMP.
SO ONE OF THE SNOWFALLS THAT
WAS DEEP ENOUGH THAT WE FELT WE
SHOULD HAVE ADDITIONAL RAMP
CLEARING BASED ON TIMING OF THE
STORM AND SUCH.
SO WE DID HAVE THEM COME
DOWNTOWN CLEAN THE RAMPS.
I THINK THAT WAS VERY
SUCCESSFUL.
WE DID NOT HAVE THE COMPLAINT
CENTER THAT WE HAD IN THE PAST
DOWN THERE AND SO OVERALL I
THINK THAT WAS HELPFUL.
ROBERT KELLER ALSO DID A LOT
OF WORK TO GET MESSAGING OUT
PRE STORM DURING STORMS.
SO I THINK IT WAS PRETTY
SUCCESSFUL AS FAR AS SIDEWALK
CLEARING WENT AND THE WORK THAT
WAS DONE IN THE DENHA BOTH BY
CONTRACTORS THAT ARE NOT
EMPLOYED BY THE CITY AND OUR
CONTRACTOR WHEN WE CALLED ON
THEM A QUESTION THE QUESTION IS
A FORTY FOUR THOUSAND IS THAT
JUST FOR THE SIDEWALKS AND
PEDESTRIAN ISLAND ON ONE
CLEARING OF DENHA RAMPS SOME
BUT IT WAS FIVE HUNDRED
THOUSAND FOR THE WHOLE SEASON
WHEN WE HAD A BUDGET OF THAT WE
DID NOT WE DID NOT NEED THE
ENTIRE FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND IT
WAS THEY WERE AS NEEDED
SERVICES AND SO IF IT SNOWED
AND WE NEEDED THEM THEY CAME IN
AND PERFORMED AND IF NOT THEN
THEY DID SO FOR EVERYTHING THAT
WE RECEIVED LAST YEAR THAT THEY
RESPONDED TO THAT TOTAL WAS
FORTY FOUR THOUSAND.
SO SO I GUESS THAT WE EXPLORED
SO ONLY FORTY FOUR OUT OF FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND THAT WAS
BUDGETED FOR THIS.
SO I GUESS WE EXPLORED
EXPANDING THE LEVEL OF SERVICE
THAT WE REQUEST FROM I I MEAN
WE CAN I DON'T THINK THERE'S
ANY LEVEL OF SERVICE THAT WE
WOULD INCREASE.
IT WOULD JUST BE ENSURING THAT
THEY THEY SHOW UP ON TIME IF
IT'S THOSE 20 TIMES WE'RE GOING
TO SPEND A LOT MORE MONEY.
BUT THIS WINTER WAS NOT A
REALLY ROUGH WINTER BY ANY
STRETCH AND SO REALLY THE CAP
IS WHAT WE WERE BUDGETED
BUDGETED BUT OUR BIDS THAT CAME
IN THIS IS OUR LOWEST OR LOWER
BID AND THE PRICING WAS
FAVORABLE FOR THE CITY.
SO I DON'T REALLY KNOW THAT
INCREASING THE LEVEL OF SERVICE
IS A POSSIBILITY REALLY UNDER
THIS CONTRACT NOW THERE WERE
ADDITIONAL ITEMS WE THAT FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND ALSO INCLUDED
RESIDENTIAL SNOWPLOWING SO IT
REALLY INCLUDED BOTH.
WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY RESIDENT
SNOWPLOW?
I GUESS SO WE'RE GOING TO MOVE
ON TO THAT FURTHER IN THE
PRESENTATION.
BUT THE FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND
THAT COMMISSION APPROVED FOR US
WAS TO PROCURE ADDITIONAL
RESIDENTIAL SNOW PLOWING
SERVICES SO THAT WE CAN PLOW
RESIDENTIAL ROADS QUICKER
DURING OUR LARGER EVENTS WHICH
WE DID USE THEM FOR AND A
PORTION OF THAT WAS FOR
CONTRACTING SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE AND PULLING THAT
WORK FROM OUR PARKS DEPARTMENT
SO THE PARKS DEPARTMENT COULD
MAINTAIN THEIR SIDEWALKS AND
PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES FASTER
AND THEN WE COULD ALSO HAVE
THESE PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
MAINTAINED FASTER SO THAT WAS
KIND OF THE DIVISION AND THE
MONEY THAT WE WERE GIVEN
BUDGETED YOU KNOW, THAT WAS THE
CAP ON THE CONTRACTS AND WE
JUST DIDN'T HAVE A HEAVY ENOUGH
WINTER TO EXHAUST THOSE FUNDS
BEFORE PETE, THERE'S A QUESTION
ON THE CHAT ABOUT AN EXPLICIT
REQUEST FOR AN EXPLANATION
OF HOW SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN
ISLANDS ARE CHOSEN TO BE
CLEARED BY THE CITY VERSUS
BEING THE PROPERTY OWNER
RESPONSIBILITY.
SO HOW DID YOU GO ABOUT
CHOOSING THESE ALL THESE
LOCATIONS?
OK, YEAH.
SO THESE ARE LONG STANDING
ARRANGEMENTS THAT WE HAVE.
THEY ARE TYPICALLY A PEDESTRIAN
FACILITY THAT DOESN'T HAVE AN
OWNER SO THINK THE BACK OF YOUR
HOUSE IF YOU LIVE ON A MAJOR
ROAD BUT YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD
FRANCE ANOTHER NEIGHBORHOOD WE
DO NOT HAVE AN AGREEMENT WITH
YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD WHEN IT WAS
BUILT FOR YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION TO TAKE OVER THAT
WORK.
THEN THE CITY MAINTAINS SO IT'S
NOT PRACTICAL PRACTICAL FOR
SOME PEOPLE TO WALK DOWN HILL
AND THROUGH THE WOODS TO GET TO
THE SIDEWALK ON THE BACK
OF THEIR HOUSE.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE FOUR
INSTANCES THAT WE TAKE ON AND
WE TAKE ON ANYTHING THAT FRONTS
A PUBLIC FACILITY OR THE BRIDGE
PEDESTRIAN ISLANDS THAT ARE
KIND OF IN THE MIDDLE OF A
ROAD.
SO THE REFUGEE ISLAND SO THOSE
ARE THE TYPE OF PEDESTRIAN
FACILITIES THAT ARE CLEARED BY
THE CITY.
>> THANK YOU.
BACK TO THE DISCUSSION ABOUT
THE FORTY FOUR THOUSAND DOLLAR
COST.
DID THAT INCLUDE THE
RESIDENTIAL STREET SNOWPLOWING
OR IS IT ONLY FOR SIDEWALKS
THAT WAS COVERED BY FORTY FOUR
THOUSAND?
>> THAT WAS THE SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE.
THANK YOU
.
I THINK WE'RE GOING TO KEEP
GOING.
OK, SO WE HAVE ALSO CONTINUE TO
INVEST IN EQUIPMENT
IMPROVEMENTS.
WE HAVE MADE ADDITIONAL ORDERS
FOR NEW PLOW TRUCKS THAT GIVE
US THE ABILITY TO ENTICE AND
CLEAR LARGER HAS A ROADWAY THE
FIRST SET OF VEHICLES SHOULD BE
DELIVERED BY THIS AUGUST.
THEY HAVE A TWO YEAR A TWO YEAR
WAITING PERIOD JUST TO GET THEM
BUILT DUE TO SUPPLY CHAIN.
SO WE DID MAKE SOME CONTINUED
INVESTMENT THERE AND THEN WE
RECEIVED NEW RENTRAK WINTER
BIKE LANE MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT
PRIOR TO THE SEASON.
SO THIS YEAR WE RAN TO CRUISE
TO CLEAR ALL OF OUR PROTECTED
BIKE FACILITIES AND THAT ALSO
INCLUDES THE PAINT AND POST
INSTALLATIONS THAT PROPERTY
OWNERS ARE NOT NECESSARILY MADE
TO CLEAR BY ORDINANCE AND THEN
ALSO THE BIKE FACILITIES WHERE
THERE'S ONE POOL KIND OF ALONG
A MAJOR ROAD.
SO WE HAVE TO WE SEND THE
SMALLER PIECE OF EQUIPMENT UP
TO THOSE LOCATIONS SO WE WERE
ABLE TO RUN TO THIS YEAR I I
FEEL LIKE WE HAD A LOT LESS
BIKE LANE COMPLAINTS OR
REQUESTS COMING INTO OUR SYSTEM
TO CLEAN THEM SO WE DID RUN TWO
CREWS AND WE WERE ABLE TO PAY
MORE ATTENTION TO THEM AND MAKE
SURE THAT WE CAN GET THE
DETAILED WORK DONE THIS YEAR.
>> WE ALSO REAL QUICK BEFORE
YOU MOVE ON ERIC QUESTION.
YEAH, I WAS JUST WONDERING HOW
SINCE IT WAS A NEW ITEM AND IF
I REMEMBER RIGHT IT'S ALL
ELECTRIC HOW THE TRACK PIECE
OF EQUIPMENT PERFORM IN YOUR
EXPERIENCE?
>> YEAH.
THIS IS ACTUALLY NOT ELECTRIC
SO ALL OF OUR SNOW EQUIPMENT,
OUR EITHER GAS OR DIESEL SO WE
DO NOT HAVE A GOOD ELECTRIC
OPTION CURRENTLY TO RUN THE
AMOUNT OF TIME AND DUTY CYCLES
THAT WE WERE ON.
>> OUR STREET SWEEPER FOR BIKE
LANES IS AN ELECTRIC STREET
SWEEPER THINKS THAT MUST BE
WHERE I WAS GOING TO CONDUCED.
YES, NO PROBLEM.
OK, SO WE CAN MOVE ON TO OUR
IMPROVED PLOW TRACKING MAP THAT
WE DEPLOYED THIS YEAR.
SO THIS YEAR WE CONTRACTED WITH
THE COMPANY TO BUILD A NEW SNOW
PLOWING MAP AND THIS IS THE
FUNCTIONALITY THAT YOU SEE ON
THE FRONT END.
WE CAN MESSAGE TELL PEOPLE WHAT
WE'RE DOING, HOW WE'RE DOING,
WHAT THE STORM WE'RE AT AND
THEN CLEARLY COMMUNICATE WHERE
WE'RE GOING TO BE NEXT.
WE ALSO HAVE A BUNCH
OF FEATURES ON THE BACK END
OF THINGS SO WE CAN RUN AND
LOOK AT THE NUMBER OF PASSES ON
A STREET IN DETAIL FROM A
SUPERVISOR JUST TO TELL IF WE
RAN MORE THAN SAY ONE PASS ON A
STREET OR COMPLETELY MISSED A
STREET OR RAN THREE TO FOUR
PASSES A STREAM.
SO THAT HELPS US TO KNOW THAT
WE PROBABLY MISSED SALTING AND
INTERSECTION IN THE MIDDLE OF A
NEIGHBORHOOD OR WE MAY HAVE
MISSED A STREET OR MAY NOT HAVE
MADE THE FULL WITH PASSES ON
STREET SO THIS WAS ONE OF THE
ADDITIONS THAT WE MADE HERE.
WE ALSO HAD A SNOWPLOW NAMING
CONTEST WHERE WE HAD ALL OF THE
ATTENDEES AT OPEN HOUSE COME
AND VOTE ON THEIR THEIR
FAVORITE NAME.
SO WE DID THAT THIS YEAR AND
STICKERED THE TRUCKS AND WE HAD
A LOT OF FUN FEEDBACK FROM BOTH
CHILDREN AND DOLZ AND SO THAT
WAS A GOOD POSITIVE FOR US BUT
REALLY THE IMPROVEMENT IS ON
THE BACK END FOR US AND THAT WE
CAN SEE AND HAVE BETTER, BETTER
ABILITIES TO SEE THE DATA AND
KNOW WHAT WE'RE DOING AND MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE FILLING AND
MAKING IT THROUGH EVERYTHING IN
OUR NEIGHBORHOODS ESPECIALLY
FROM OUR GO AHEAD.
YEAH, FOR THE CLOUD TRACKING IS
THERE AN OPPORTUNITY THERE FOR
BECAUSE I KNOW A LOT OF PEOPLE
WERE COMPLAINING ABOUT THE
SIDEWALKS.
THEY WOULD BE CLEARED BY THE
CONTRACTOR AND THEN THE CITY
PLOWS WOULD COME THROUGH
ESPECIALLY ON PARKWAY WHERE THE
SIDEWALK IS.
YOU KNOW, THE SPEEDS ARE PRETTY
HIGH AND THE SNOW CAN GET
THROWN ONTO THE SIDEWALK.
IS THERE LIKE AN OPPORTUNITY TO
HAVE THE CONTRACTOR LIKE
BASICALLY USE THIS APPLICATION
TO FOLLOW BEHIND OR MAKE SURE
THAT THEY DON'T, YOU KNOW, RUN
THESE PLOWS SO THEY DON'T HAVE
TO DO IT TWICE?
>> YEAH, IF IT IS AN AREA THAT
IS CITY PLOWED OUR OUR CITY
CONTRACTORS ARE REQUIRED TO
COME BACK AND AS A CYCLE GO
BACK THROUGH CHECK FOR LINDROS
AND CHECK FOR ANYTHING THAT
MIGHT HAVE COME UP ONTO
SIDEWALKS.
SO OUR CITY CONTRACTOR THAT
MAINTAINS ALL THE WALKS FOR US
ALREADY THAT IS A REQUIREMENT
THEIR CONTRACT AND THAT THEY
COME BACK AND CHECK EVERYTHING
AGAIN
ALL ALL RIGHT.
>> SO ANOTHER ITEM THAT PASSED
THIS YEAR WITH CITY COUNCIL IS
THE APPROVED STREET PARKING BAN
.
SO THIS LOOKS TO ADDRESS THE
OLD ORDINANCE THAT WE HAD THAT
WAS REALLY DIFFICULT TO
UNDERSTAND AND AND REALLY WE
COULDN'T WE WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO ENFORCE THAT OR HAVE
THAT UTILIZED.
SO WHAT WE HAVE DONE IS
CREATED THE ABILITY FOR US TO
CALL US SNOW AND SNOW PARKING
BAN AND THEN WE'LL BE ABLE TO
ENFORCE IT IF NEEDED WHERE WE
NEED TO.
SO WE'RE CURRENTLY LOOKING FOR
SOME ALTERNATIVE PARKING AREAS
FOR THOSE THAT ARE CHALLENGED.
WE'VE CREATED A MAP THAT WILL
BE ON THE WEBSITE THAT ALLOWS
PEOPLE TO KNOW IF THEIR STREET
IS EXEMPT AND THE EXEMPTIONS
THAT WE HAD MADE WERE MAINLY
LOCATIONS WHERE THERE WERE NO
DRIVEWAYS AT ALL.
SO WHAT WE HAD FOUND IN MOST
OF OUR AREAS, EVEN IN CERTAIN
SECTIONS WHEN WE BOTH DID
DRIVING SURVEYS AND GOOGLE MAPS
SURVEYS AND THINGS OF THAT
NATURE THAT PEOPLE HAVE A LOT
OF PARKING FACILITIES AND SO WE
WE WE MAINLY ONLY EXEMPTED THE
AREAS WITH NO DRIVEWAYS SO
THERE WILL BE A LIST AND THERE
IS A MAP THAT IS ON THE CITY'S
WEBSITE.
WE ALSO CREATED THE ABILITY FOR
A RESIDENT TO REQUEST AN
EXEMPTION FOR THEIR STREET.
WE INTEND TO LOOK AT THEM BLOCK
BY BLOCK ON THE OFF SEASON IF
NECESSARY.
BUT THE REALITY IS WE NEED THE
SPACE TO CLEAR SNOW EFFICIENTLY
AND EFFECTIVELY AND TO NOT YOU
KNOW, TO NOT MISS CROSSWALKS
AND CORNERS AND THINGS.
SO THIS ORDINANCE WILL REALLY
HELP US AVOID THINGS OF THIS
NATURE WHERE WE COULDN'T EVEN
SCRAPE THE AREA BECAUSE THE
BLADE IS HITTING THE CURB ON
THE RIGHT BECAUSE OF THE WAY
PEOPLE ARE PARKED EVERYWHERE.
SO WE DO INTEND TO USE THIS
WHEN WE HAVE FOUR INCHES OR
MORE OF SNOW ON THE GROUND
THERE.
YOU KNOW, THE FIRST YEAR WE
WILL NOT BE OUT PICKETING AND
TOWING.
WE HOPE TO GRADUALLY ENFORCE
THIS FIRST BY HAVING PEOPLE
JUST VOLUNTARILY WORK WITH THE
ORDINANCE AND THEN AND THEN
MOVE ON TO ENFORCEMENT WHERE
NECESSARY.
SO WE HOPE TO AVOID ISSUES LIKE
THIS WHERE THIS IS AN ACTUAL A
FIXTURE WHERE SOMEBODY SAID YOU
MISSED PLOWING IN FRONT MY
HOUSE BUT YOU KNOW, WE DIDN'T
MISS PLOWING THERE.
THERE WAS CLEARLY A CAR THAT
WAS PARKED THERE.
SO WE HAVE TO GO BACK AND GO
AND DO A SLOT IN AN AREA LIKE
THIS WHEN THEY'RE ON THE CORNER
WE THEN END UP WITH FOUR OR
FIVE, SIX FEET THAT A
PEDESTRIAN HAS TO TRAVERSE TO
GET OUT TO THE TO GET OUT INTO
THE CLEAR PAVEMENT AREA TO
CROSS THE ROAD.
SO WE HOPE THAT THESE THINGS
WILL HELP OUR PEDESTRIAN
FEATURES AND HELP US TO PLOW
ROADS BETTER, FASTER AND AND
THEN MORE SAFE FOR OUR DRIVERS
AND PEOPLE'S PROPERTY.
>> YOU ANTICIPATE DECLARING IT
,YOU KNOW, REGIONALLY WITHIN
THE CITY FOCUS ON JUST ONE
QUARTER OF THE CITY FOR TWELVE
HOURS OR SOMETHING, THEN MOVE
OR JUST THE WHOLE CITY.
IT'S MAINLY THE WHOLE CITY WE
WE EXEMPT THE DDA AREA BECAUSE
THERE ARE ALREADY PARKING
RESTRICTIONS SO WE CAN GET IN
THERE AND PLOW THAT BETWEEN
THREE AND SIX A.M. WHEN WHEN WE
HAVE WHEN WE HAVE OUR BLACKOUT
PERIODS FOR PARKING MAINLY IT'S
ALL RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
IT WILL BE AT THE SAME TIME WE
INTEND TO GIVE PEOPLE A
STARTING TIME TO IT'S SUPPOSED
TO START IF IT'S SUPPOSED TO
SNOW FOR TWELVE HOURS AND NOT
STOP WE'RE NOT GOING TO TELL
YOU NOT TO PARK ON THE STREET
THE MINUTE THE FIRST SNOWFLAKE
FALLS BECAUSE WE KNOW WE WON'T
BE IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
SO WHAT WE WILL BE DOING IS
TIMING THE SNOW BAND TO START
AROUND THE TIME WHEN WE EXPECT
TO BE IN NEIGHBORHOODS AND WITH
OUR WITH OUR IN-HOUSE STAFF AND
THEN OUR CONTRACTED SERVICE
PEOPLE.
THIS BAND WILL NOT BE LIKELY
FOR MORE THAN IT WILL LIKELY BE
ON LESS THAN TWENTY FOUR HOURS
WHEN WE DO USE I THINK IT WOULD
BE AN EXCEPTIONAL SNOWSTORM IF
WE WERE TO GET INTO A SITUATION
WHERE WE HAD TO RUN THIS THING
LONGER THAN A TWENTY FOR OUR
BAND BECAUSE WE DO ALREADY HAVE
A SERVICE LEVEL THAT SAYS FROM
THE MINUTE IT STOPS SNOWING WE
HAVE TWENTY FOUR HOURS TO CLEAR
ALL OF OUR RESIDENTIAL AREAS SO
WE NORMALLY ALWAYS MEET THAT
AND I WOULDN'T EXPECT A SNOW
BAND TO GO ON FOR EXTENDED
PERIODS OF TIME.
THEY GET THAT'S DROP AND THEN
SO YES.
SO THIS IS HOW WE PLAN TO DO
IT.
WE'LL WE'LL PUT IT ON A MINIMUM
OF TWELVE HOURS IN ADVANCE
OF WHEN WE EXPECT PEOPLE TO
MOVE THEIR CARS AND WE'LL USE
ALL OF THE MEDIA OPTIONS THAT
WE HAVE.
WE'RE ALSO LOOKING AT EVERY
BRIDGE AND THINGS OF THAT
NATURE AND CONSCRIBED LIVES FOR
PEOPLE.
WE HAVE LINKS ON OUR CITY
WEBSITE THAT'S MAYBE THE PAGE
MAY NOT BE FULLY LAUNCHED YET
BUT AT LEAST THE DRAFT PAGE
WE'VE PUT ALL THOSE IN SO
PEOPLE CAN SUBSCRIBE IF YOU
LIVE IN AN AREA WHERE YOU
PARKING'S A CHALLENGE, THEY CAN
SUBSCRIBE FOR A LINK.
THERE WILL BE NO SURPRISES AND
WE USE A SO YEAH.
>> SO THIS IS JUST MORE
INFORMATION ON THAT.
WE PLANNED A MULTIYEAR RAMP UP.
THERE WILL BE LOTS OF LOTS
OF EFFORTS MADE AROUND TRYING
TO GET MUSCLE MEMORY FOR FOR
ALL OF OUR RESIDENTS BECAUSE WE
REALIZE THIS IS A NEW THING IN
IOWA.
IT'S PRETTY WELL USED OR
HEAVILY USED IN THE REST
OF MICHIGAN NOT HERE AND THEN
WE ALSO HAVE THE CHALLENGE FOR
STUDENTS.
SO WE INTEND TO KEEP WORKING
WITH OUR PARTNERS IN THE
COMMUNITY AND TO GET THIS WORD
EVERY SINGLE YEAR AND WE'LL
COORDINATE BETWEEN POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT WHENEVER WE MAKE
THIS DECISION.
SO THOSE WERE THE MAIN CHANGES
THAT WE MADE THAT YEAR
RESIDENTIAL ROADS WE PLOWED
EVERYTHING A A TIMES THIS YEAR
SO WE PLOWED THINGS A LITTLE
MORE OFTEN BUT OUR TWENTY FOUR
HOUR NO PLOWING EFFORTS AND
RESIDENTIAL ROADS THAT ONLY
HAPPENED TWO TIMES THAT WE HAD
TO BRING IN QUICK AND SO IT WAS
A LOT OF HELP.
WE WE WERE ABLE TO GET THINGS
DONE FASTER WITH OUR CONTRACTED
SUPPORT WHEN THEY CAME IN TO
HELP AND SO I THINK IT WAS A
HUGE SUCCESS.
WE DID HAVE A LOT OF FEEDBACK
ON CERTAIN THINGS WHERE PEOPLE
WERE SURPRISED THE STREET WAS
PUT OUT A LOT FASTER THAN THAN
MOST YEARS.
WE STILL HAVE THE SAME ISSUE
WITH OUR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
WHERE THEY IF YOUR CANS ARE
ALREADY OUT IN YOUR SECTION
PURPOSELY DO NOT PILE THOSE
THOSE SECTIONS UNTIL THE NEXT
DAY ONCE ALL THEIR CANS ARE
BROUGHT IN BECAUSE OTHERWISE
WE'RE FIGHTING DRIVING AROUND
GARBAGE CANS AND THEN KNOCKING
THEM OVER SO I SEE WE HAVE A
QUESTION BUT YEAH I WAS JUST
WONDERING IF THERE WAS LIKE A
CAVEATS OR QUALIFIERS TO THE
TWENTY FOUR HOUR PLOWING RULE
JUST I MEAN I THAT'S DEFINITELY
NOT THE CASE FOR MY STREET AND
I'M NOT COMPLAINING ABOUT MY
STREET IN PARTICULAR BUT I'M
JUST WONDERING IF THERE IS LIKE
I CAN'T SEE IT CAN'T IN MY MIND
BE TRUE THAT YOU'RE HITTING
THAT TWENTY FOUR HOUR MARK.
SO I'M JUST WONDERING IF YOU'RE
ONLY FOCUSED LIKE CERTAIN LEVEL
OF RESIDENTIAL STREET LIKE IN
WHAT THE STANDARD WOULD BE FOR
FOR ALL STREETS.
>> YEAH.
SO AFTER SNOW STOPS FALLING
IT'S REALLY IT'S ALL STREETS SO
WE AIM TO HAVE EVERY SINGLE
RESIDENTIAL STREET PLOWED NOW
IT WON'T BE SALTED DOWN TO BARE
PAVEMENT OR ANY OF THOSE THINGS
BUT THE MAIN PLOW AFTER WE HIT
FOUR INCHES OR MORE IS IS SET
AT TWENTY FOUR HOURS AND THAT'S
AFTER IT STOPS THEM THERE.
>> WHAT IS YOUR PREFERRED
METHOD FOR IF THAT EXPECTATION
ISN'T BEING MET IS THAT TO FIX
IT OR IS THERE SOME OTHER WAY
THAT IT'S MORE HELPFUL TO GET
FEEDBACK ON THAT?
>> SURE YES.
SO A FIX IS PERFECT.
WE HAVE A SNOW AND ICE ON LOCAL
ROADS REQUEST TYPE AND THAT'S
THE BEST WAY IN THE FASTEST WAY
FOR US TO GET A RESPONSE BACK
IF I COULD.
THE KEY THING WOULD BE THE FOUR
INCH BREAKS.
I DON'T KNOW HOW MANY TIMES
WE'VE EVEN HAD MORE THAN FOUR
INCHES OF SNOW THIS PAST SEASON
MAYBE PAUL WAS JUST A COUPLE
OF TIMES YEAH, TWO TIMES TO
TAKE THEIR TIME.
IT'S WE HAD A LOT OF JUST A
LITTLE BIT HERE, A LITTLE BIT
THERE TWO INCHES TODAY MAYBE AN
TOMORROW.
SO WE HAD A LOT OF SMALLER
SNOWSTORMS AND WHEN WE GET
THOSE WE PLOW THOSE JUST ON
MCKERROW OR ON A ROTATION ON
OUR NORMAL STRAIGHT TIME SHIFTS
AND JUST KIND OF WORK THROUGH
NEIGHBORHOODS BUT TYPICALLY IN
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE WE'RE
PLOWING ONLY WHEN WE'RE OVER
FOUR INCHES AND WE ARE SALTING
WHEN OTHERWISE RESULTING JUST
INTERSECTIONS, HILLS AND CURVES
AND WE'RE NOT SALTING
EVERYTHING FOR FULL LENGTHS
OF STREETS BECAUSE WE'RE YEAH,
WE LOOK TO CONSERVE SALT.
WE KNOW SALT IS A POLLUTANT.
SPEEDS ARE SLOW ON LOCAL ROADS
AND
ACCIDENTS ARE MINIMAL AND
SO THAT'S THAT'S BEEN OUR
APPROACH.
THANKS FOR THIS PRESENTATION.
I'VE GOT A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS.
OK, IS THERE A MAP OF THE CITY
CLEARED SIDEWALKS THAT YOU KNOW
THAT WE ACKNOWLEDGE ARE EITHER
PARKS OR A CONTRACTOR OR CITY
THAT WE'RE GOING TO CLEAR?
>> YES.
SO THE MAP ON MY SCREEN
CURRENTLY IS THE PORTION THAT
PUBLIC WORKS IS RESPONSIBLE
FOR.
SO THESE ARE THE THE PIECES
THAT WE'RE CONTRACTING OUT.
>> SO YES, THIS MAP IS
AVAILABLE.
OK, THAT PUBLIC WORKS.
SO IS PARKS RESPONSIBLE FOR
SOME OF THIS AND ARE THERE
OTHER PEOPLE IN THE CITY THAT
ARE DOING SOME OF THE CLEARING
SNOW CLEARING?
>> YEAH.
PARKS DEPARTMENT MAINTAINS THE
SIDEWALKS THAT ARE IN PARKS
FACILITIES SO ANY PARK ICE
ARENA, ANY OF THEIR FACILITIES
,THEY MAINTAIN THE SIDEWALKS
THAT FRONT THEY'RE LOCATIONS
AND THEN ANY OF THE WALKS
WITHIN INCLUDING MORE AND MORE.
>> OK, SO HOW DO I HOW DO I GET
SOMETHING ADDED TO THIS MAN IF
I SEE SOMETHING THAT SHOULD BE
THERE?
IT ISN'T LIKE THE NEW REFUGE
ISLAND AT THE CORNER
OF CHURCHILL AND SAVE A CHURCH
SORT OF ON THE SOUTHWEST SIDE
OF THE CITY THAT WAS INSTALLED
TWENTY TWENTY TWO.
SO HOW ARE HOW ARE WE MAKING
SURE THAT NEW INFRASTRUCTURE
LIKE THAT GETS ADDED IN?
WELL I WASN'T AWARE THAT THAT
ONE WAS NOT ADDED SO WE HAVE A
PROCESS IN PLACE THAT WHENEVER
I SAY NEW ALL ALTERATIONS
FACILITY GOES IN ST. POST OR A
REFUGE ISLAND OR THINGS OF THAT
NATURE AT LEAST OVER THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS NOW THIS WAS
NOT A LOCATION OR THIS WAS NOT
SOMETHING THAT WAS MAINTAINED
BY PUBLIC WORKS PRIOR BUT WE
ARE ACTIVELY ADDING ALL THESE
THINGS EVERY SINGLE FALL TO
BEEF UP THAT LAYER.
SO I WAS NOT AWARE THAT THAT
WAS MISSING FROM THE FROM THIS
LAYER AND SO I MEAN IT WOULD BE
IT WOULD BE HELPFUL TO SEE WHAT
PARKS ACKNOWLEDGES IS THERE'S
ALSO SO THAT WHEN YOU RELATE IT
TO NOW, YOU KNOW, YOU COULD
LOOK AT THAT TO SEE THAT
EVERYTHING IS COVERED OR NOT
RIGHT.
AND PART REALLY IS JUST PARKS
FACILITIES.
SO IF THERE IS A FEATURE IN THE
RIGHT AWAY THAT IS NOT GETTING
CLEARED, IT IS NOT REPRESENTED
ON THIS MAP, THEN THAT IS IS
DEFINITELY SOMETHING THAT WOULD
BE HAPPENED HERE.
SO I AM HAPPY TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE TAKE ANOTHER PASS THROUGH.
>> OK WELL THANK YOU SO IN THIS
CASE I'M THINKING OF THE
SIDEWALK ON THE WEST SIDE
OF MAPLE ROAD AGAIN ON THE FAR
SOUTH WEST CORNER.
THAT'S NOT PARKLAND EXACTLY BUT
SOMEBODY FROM THE CITY IS
CLEARING IT.
IT'S NOT OWNED BY ANY RESIDENTS
OR ANYTHING.
THE WHERE MAPLE ROAD SORT
OF CROSSES OVER NINETY FOR THAT
NEAR THE INTERSECTION OF SAINT
CHURCH MAPLE.
THERE'S A THERE'S SOME SIDEWALK
THERE AND I DON'T KNOW IF PARKS
IS DOING IT.
I DON'T KNOW WHO IS DOING IT
AGAIN.
IT'D BE NICE IF WE COULD THE
WHOLE MAP AND THEN WE COULD
SEE.
ALL RIGHT WELL THIS GUY'S GOT
THIS FEATURE THAT'S IMPORTANT
TO ME AND THIS OTHER DEPARTMENT
HAS THIS OTHER FEATURE THAT'S
IMPORTANT TO ME.
>> SO WE CAN CERTAINLY ARRANGE
FOR THAT.
OK, I THINK YOU KNOW, THESE ARE
ALL MAPPED THEY'RE ALL
AVAILABLE TO US AND SO I'LL BE
ABLE TO WORK WITH YOU TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE NOT MISSING
SOMETHING, OK?
>> AND I WILL SAY THAT THE THAT
IN GENERAL EVEN THINGS THAT
AREN'T SHOWN HERE I DON'T KNOW
IF PARKES WAS DOING THEM OR WHO
BUT IT WAS BETTER THIS YEAR AND
WORKED OUT REALLY WELL AND AND
THE TIMES WHEN IT DIDN'T GET
DONE A TO FIX IT GOT IT TAKEN
CARE OF RELATIVELY QUICKLY.
>> SO THAT WAS AN IMPROVEMENT
FOR THIS YEAR.
THE OTHER QUESTION THAT I HAVE
IS WHAT DO WE DO AT OUR BORDERS
WITH WITH OTHER MUNICIPALITIES
AND CAN WE CAN WE MAYBE AIR ON
THE SIDE OF A CROSS BORDER
INCURSION INTO PITTSVILLE
TOWNSHIP OR LIKE CAN WE CAN WE
ALL AGREE TO TO DO A LITTLE BIT
MORE BETWEEN US AND PITTSFIELD
IN THE OTHER SURROUNDING
TOWNSHIPS?
SO AGAIN, I'M LOOKING THE AREA
NEAR MY HOUSE.
I'M THINKING OF THE THE BRIDGE
THAT GOES OVER NINETY FOUR TO
PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP BY THE ICE
CUBE AND I GUESS I'D RATHER
THAT WE HAVE PITTSFIELD AND US
PLOWING THAT INSTEAD OF NEITHER
OF US PLOWING IT.
SO IS THERE ANYTHING WE CAN DO
TO LIKE TAKE IT UP A NOTCH AND
GO A LITTLE BIT BEYOND STRICTLY
WHERE OUR BORDER IS?
THERE'S NOTHING STOPPING US
FROM DOING THAT BECAUSE WHEN WE
HAVE A DISAGREEMENT OR A
MISALIGNMENT IN EXPECTATIONS
AMONG THE MUNICIPALITIES, THEN
OUR PEOPLE WHO ARE TRYING TO
WALK AND USE THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE SUFFER.
SO WHAT'S THE RIGHT WAY TO
HANDLE THOSE BORDERS?
I THINK I I CANNOT ANSWER THAT
RIGHT THIS MOMENT.
I THINK I WOULD NEED TO TALK TO
OUR FINANCE TEAM AND MAKE SURE
THAT WE'RE NOT MISAPPROPRIATING
FUNDING AND SEARCH FOR A
FUNDING OPPORTUNITY IF IF IF
NEEDED THAT CAN SUPPORT OK SO
YEAH A A ROCK SOLID PLAN WITH
LIKE OVERCOMMUNICATION BETWEEN
PITTSFIELD AND EVERY TOWNSHIP
AND THE OTHER TOWNSHIPS LIKE
THAT'S ANOTHER ALTERNATIVE JUST
MIGHT BE HARDER TO MAINTAIN
OVER TIME BUT BUT WE NEED
SOMETHING TO MAKE SURE THAT
THAT THOSE AREAS GET PLOWED
BECAUSE WHAT I SAW THIS YEAR
WAS LIKE YOU KNOW IT WAS PLOWED
IN THE CITY THERE OUTSIDE
OF CHURCH AND IT WAS PLOWED
OVER BY THE ICE YOU ON THE
SIDEWALKS BUT IN THE AREA IN
BETWEEN WAS NOT DONE.
SO WE'VE GOT A PROBLEM WITH OUR
CONNECTIVITY WHEN THAT HAPPENS.
YEAH, SO THANKS FOR ACTUALLY
LOOKING IN.
>> I DO HAVE ONE LAST THING
WHICH IS UM DO WE HAVE ANY
METRICS FOR OUR GENERAL SNOW
REMOVAL LIKE WE HAVE A STANDARD
THAT APPLIES TO WHAT THE CITY
DOES.
WE HAVE A STANDARD THAT APPLIES
TO WHAT PROPERTY OWNERS ARE
SUPPOSED TO DO.
IS ANYBODY KEEPING TRACK OF HOW
WELL EVERYONE IS DOING?
I HAVE A SENSE FOR YOU KNOW,
ABOUT HOW WELL PEOPLE IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD DO FOR PLOWING OR
CLEARING THEIR SIDEWALKS AND IT
WOULD BE NICE TO KNOW WHAT THAT
IS OVER TIME SO THAT IF WE'RE
IF WE IF WE START TO FALL OFF
WE START TO LIKE NOT DO AS
WELL, THEN WE KNOW THAT THAT'S
A PLACE WE NEED TO FOCUS ON
WITH MESSAGING AND
ENCOURAGEMENT AND ENFORCEMENT.
SO IS ANYBODY MEASURING HOW
WELL WE'RE DOING?
WELL, I MEAN WE HAVE ALL OF OUR
SERVICE REQUEST DATA THAT COMES
IN.
SO IF PEOPLE ARE REQUESTING
SERVICE FOR EITHER PRIVATE SNOW
CLEARING OR PUBLIC SNOW
CLEARING OR SNOW AND ICE ON
LOCAL MAJOR ROADS, WE CERTAINLY
KNOW BASED ON THOSE NUMBERS
WHERE WE'RE LACKING SO AND THEN
INTERNALLY WE HAVE OUR OUR
GOALS IN PUBLIC WORKS FOR LIKE
I SAY OUR STRATEGY ON ROADS AND
BIKE LANES AND AND THEN OUR
LOCAL ROADS AND SO WE'RE
ENSURING THAT OUR STANDARDS ARE
MET THERE.
I'M NOT GOING TO SAY WE'RE
ALWAYS PERFECT THERE BUT WE CAN
CERTAINLY TRACK OUR REQUESTS
FROM OUR CONSTITUENTS THAT COME
IN LETTING US KNOW WHERE WE'RE
LACKING AND THAT'S REALLY
CITYWIDE.
>> OK, I GUESS I'D LIKE TO PUT
IN A PLUG FOR A PERHAPS A MORE
OBJECTIVE MEASURE.
RIGHT?
I MEAN WE CAN HAVE SECRET FOLKS
CAN GO ONE WAY OR THE OTHER IF
YOU HAVE THE VERY MOTIVATED
ISSUE OPEN OR WE'RE NOT YOU
MIGHT GET DIFFERENT RESULTS AND
SEE CLICK FIX OR IF PEOPLE
DON'T WANT TO REPORT THEIR
NEIGHBORS, YOU KNOW, WE MIGHT
NOT BE SEEING THE WHOLE PICTURE
THROUGH SEE CLICK FIX OR BE
NICE TO HAVE SOME OBJECTIVE
MEASURE TO FALL BACK ON THAT'S
JUST MY MY REQUEST I GUESS.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THIS FROM ANY OTHER QUESTIONS
OR COMMENTS
OR WAS THAT THE
END?
>> PAUL I THINK THAT IS THE END
SO THANK YOU THANK YOU VERY
MUCH FOR COMING BY AND
ANSWERING OUR QUESTIONS.
I'D REALLY APPRECIATE LIKE
YOU'VE MENTIONED IN THOSE KIND
OF AN EASY WINTER I THOUGHT
FROM MY PERSPECTIVE THINGS WERE
NOTICEABLY BETTER AROUND THE
CITY AND THAT'S REFLECTED IN
THE THICKSET REQUEST THAT YOU
GOT.
SO I GUESS I WOULD SAY JUST
KEEP UP THE GOOD WORK AND LOOK
FORWARD TO SEEING HOW THESE
DIVERGENCES WORK OUT THIS NEXT.
OH THAT WOULD BE GREAT IF WE
HAD NO NEED FOR THEM BUT THAT'S
GOING TO BE THE CASE ALL RIGHT.
THANKS AGAIN.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP IS THE NIXON ROAD
PROJECT UPDATE PHASE ONE
CONSTRUCTION OF THE NIXON ROAD
PROJECT WILL BEGIN IN MAY AND
SO WE HAVE CHRIS WALL FROM
WHICH ROOM PRESENTATION
SCHEDULE FOR PHASE ONE AND TO
TALK ABOUT THE TRANSPORTATION
DESIGN.
SO CHRIS, HOPEFULLY BRITISHER.
YEP.
THANK YOU EVERYBODY SEE THE
PRESENTATION
?
>> THERE IT IS.
ALL RIGHT.
I'M JOINED BY JOHN TANNER, JOHN
CSAR CONSTRUCTION PROJECT
MANAGER WITH LEITRIM.
I'M ALSO WITH WEIGHT ON THE
CITY PROJECT MANAGER
REPRESENTATIVE SO HAPPY TO BE
HERE TO TALK ABOUT THE NIXON
ROAD IMPROVEMENT PROJECT AS AS
YOU MENTIONED, WE ARE PLANNING
TO HAVE CONSTRUCTION START IN
MAY.
WE'RE REALLY EXCITED TO HAVE
THEM THAT BINLADIN OCCUR ON
APRIL 4TH AND HAVE REALLY GOOD
PRICING COME IN.
SO RIGHT AFTER ED'S
PRESENTATION ACTUALLY OF A CHAT
SAYING THAT THE PRICES CAME IN
LOWER THAN WHAT WE EXPECTED, WE
SHOULD SEE SOME SAVINGS IN THE
BUDGET COMPARED TO WHAT ED WAS
PRESENTING.
>> SO THAT'S GOOD NEWS FOR THE
FOR THE CITY.
JUST A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE
PROJECT AREA.
THE NIXON ROAD PROJECT EXTENDS
FROM CURRENT PARKWAY IN THE
SOUTH SIDE TO THE BARN TOOK ON
THE NORTH SIDE.
SO OBVIOUSLY IT'S BOUND BY TWO
ROUNDABOUTS.
IT'S ABOUT POINT EIGHT MILES.
A LOT OF RESIDENTIAL AREA FOR
PEOPLE THAT ARE FAMILIAR THERE
IT'S FORD AND TO IF WE HAVE
THREE SCHOOLS IT'S A VERY BUSY
GROWING AREA HOW THIS PROJECT
INCORPORATED A LOT OF CITY
GOALS.
SOME OF THE PRIMARY ONES WAS
MOVING TOGETHER THE VISION ZERO
GOALS WE INCORPORATED A LOT
OF SPEED REDUCTION TECHNIQUES
IN THERE WITH THE ROUNDABOUTS
AND ALSO THE TIGHTER LANE AND
REDUCING THE WIDTH BUT ALSO
PROVIDING REAL NICE OFFERS FOR
BIKERS BUT ALSO REDUCING THE
CROSSING LIMITS FOR PEDESTRIANS
AND PROVIDING NICE REFUGE AND
MEDIANS FOR THEM ALSO TO ZERO
WAS A BIG FOCUS ON THIS TRYING
TO ENCOURAGE OTHER MODES GREEN
MODES AND TRYING TO REDUCE
EMISSIONS BY USE OF THOSE OTHER
MODES BUT ALSO THE ROUNDABOUTS
INHERENTLY ALLOW LESS IDLING
OF VEHICLES SO IDLING USUALLY
GENERATES MORE EMISSIONS.
SO BY KEEPING THE TRAFFIC OR
REDUCING THE IDLING AND
REDUCING THE DELAYS ON THE
VEHICLES WHERE WE'RE HELPING
REDUCE THOSE EMISSIONS, SOME
OF THE KEY PROJECT ELEMENTS ARE
INCLUDED IN THIS NEXEN PROJECT
ARE THREE CORE ROUNDABOUTS
WHICH JOHN WILL POINT OUT THESE
EVOLVED FROM THE TWENTY
SEVENTEEN STUDY AS MANY OF YOU
ARE PROBABLY WHERE THIS WAS A
LONG DURATION PROJECT.
THIS IS MANY YEARS IN THE
MAKING THE THREE ROUNDABOUTS
CAME FROM A TWENTY SEVENTEEN
STUDY.
IT WAS THE PREFERRED
ALTERNATIVE SPEAKING TO ALL THE
RESIDENTS INVOLVED.
THERE'S A LOT OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT AND THIS THE
ROUNDABOUT OPTIONS WAS THE
PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE PRIMARY
FOCUS OF THAT WAS TO REDUCE
DELAYS, IMPROVE ACCESS AND
REDUCE SPEEDS.
>> ALSO PART OF THIS PROJECT
WAS A BIG ELEMENT WAS INCLUDED
A PROTECTED BIKE LANES.
WE INCLUDED A LOT MORE PRESSURE
ACROSS BLOCKS.
WE ALSO INCLUDED RACE
CROSSWALKS AND TREEBEARD NIXON
ROUNDABOUT WHICH JOHN WILL SHOW
YOU.
WE MADE SURE WE HAD A LOT
OF SIDEWALK CONNECTIVITY.
WE WORKED WITH OUR TRANSIT
PARTNERS IN THIS AND MAKING
SURE THAT TRANSIT FACILITIES
BUS STOPS ALONG THE ROUTE.
IN ADDITION AND OUR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS WAS DOING SOME
IMPROVEMENTS OR PLANNING TO DO
SOME IMPROVEMENTS ON THEIR
SCHOOL SYSTEM.
SO WE'VE DONE INCOORDINATION ON
BUS DROP OFFS AND THEIR
DRIVEWAYS AS WELL AND THEN WE
HAVE A TON OF INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS RELATED TO ROAD
WATER MAIN AND STORMWATER
FACILITY.
WE'RE DOING A LOT OF STORMWATER
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
ENHANCEMENTS ON THE PROJECT.
I MENTIONED THE PROJECT HAS
BEEN LOOKED AT FOR A LONG TIME.
IT'S BEEN OVER A DECADE SO BACK
IN TWENTY THIRTEEN PEOPLE WE'RE
LOOKING AT THE NIXON GREEN AND
ROUNDABOUT INTERSECTION AREA
AND THAT EVOLVED INTO A STUDY
ALONG THE ENTIRE CORRIDOR IN
TWENTY FIFTEEN IN TWENTY
SEVENTEEN.
THE RESULT THAT STUDY WITH ALL
THE PUBLIC INPUT WAS A
PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE I MENTION
OF ROUNDABOUTS ALONG THE
CORRIDOR CITY COUNCIL DIRECTED
CITY STAFF TO PREPARE DESIGN
WITH THESE ROUNDABOUTS ON THE
CORRIDOR AND THAT WAS TAKEN IN
THE TWENTY EIGHTEEN AND INTO
TWENTY NINETEEN INTO THE DESIGN
PHASE UP TO MID TWENTY NINETEEN
WHERE WE HAD ABOUT A 90 PERCENT
DESIGN SET.
WE HAD A LOT OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT AT THAT TIME.
THAT'S WHEN WE HAD THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEETING WHICH TOOK A LOT OF THE
FEEDBACK AND REFINED THE DESIGN
UPDATED THE COST ESTIMATES AND
SHELVED THE PLAN, SAID OK
FUNDING INTEGRATED THAT INTO
THE CAPITAL PROGRAM CFP AND
BUDGETED FOR THESE IMPROVEMENTS
OVER THE YEARS AND AROUND
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR WE'RE READY
TO ACTUALLY PURSUE CONSTRUCTION
OF SOME OF THESE PROJECTS SO
HOLLOW SHELLS OFF THE PLANT ARE
THE PLANS OFF THE SHELF AND
UPDATED THOSE HAD A COUPLE
OF PUBLIC MEETINGS TO TRY
ENHANCE AND REFINE SOME OF THE
DESIGN ELEMENTS AND THEN PUT
THEM OUT TO BID.
AND LIKE I SAID IN APRIL WE
RECEIVED SOME OF THE RESULTS.
>> SO A LONG PROCESS TO GET TO
THIS POINT.
SO I'M GOING TO HAND IT OVER TO
JOHN TO TALK THROUGH SOME
OF THE PHASING AND SOME OF THE
ELEMENTS OF THE PROJECT.
HELLO EVERYONE.
SO THE PROJECT IS BROKEN INTO
THREE PHASES.
THIS IS PHASE ONE.
YOU CAN SEE THE EXISTING
ROUNDABOUT TO THE TO THE SOUTH
AND THEN SEVERAL BUS STOPS ARE
SHOWN AS WELL AS THE THE
BICYCLE LANE AS CROSSWALKS AND
THE FIRST ROUNDABOUT THAT'S
THAT'S SHOWN THERE AND YOU CAN
GO TO THE NEXT ONE.
SO THE PHASE TWO SO I SHOULD
SAY PHASE ONE WOULD BE
CONSTRUCTED THIS YEAR AND WE'LL
TALK A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT
THE THE SCHEDULE IN A COUPLE
OF SLIDES.
BUT PHASE ONE WILL BE
CONSTRUCTED THIS YOUR GOAL IS
TO GET THAT DONE BEFORE SCHOOL
STARTS AND THEN PHASE TWO WILL
START UP NEXT YEAR ABOUT THIS
TIME AND WILL INCLUDE TWO
ROUNDABOUTS AS SHOWN HERE AND
INCLUDES SIMILAR AMENITIES AS
WELL AS BUS STOP AND SIDEWALK
AND BIKE PATH AND AND THE
TRAILER ROUNDABOUT YOU CAN SEE
WELL THERE ARE RACIST
CROSSWALKS THAT CHRIS HAD
MENTIONED BEFORE SO THAT WILL
BE WHERE THE RACE CROSSWALKS
ARE.
IT CAN GO TO THE NEXT SLIDE.
SO THE ROUNDABOUTS AND THE THE
RACE CROSS WORKS WILL ALSO HELP
TO SLOW TRAFFIC DOWN A LITTLE
BIT LIKE CHRIS MENTIONED.
AND THEN PHASE THREE AFTER THE
PHASE TWO IS THE GOAL IS TO BE
DONE BEFORE SCHOOL STARTS NEXT
YEAR.
SO 2026 AFTER PHASE TWO IS
COMPLETED, PHASE THREE WILL
BEGIN AND WILL BE DONE INTO THE
END OF THE CONSTRUCTION SEASON
.
WE'D KNOCK ON WOOD THAT
EVERYTHING WORKS OUT WELL AND
THAT'LL BE WRAPPED UP IN
DECEMBER 2026.
>> NEXT SLIDE.
SO FOR THE PROJECT IT'S AS WE
HAD MENTIONED, IT'S A THREE
PHASE PROJECT.
IT'LL BE A FULL DETOUR AND THEN
THEY'LL BE THE THE SAME DETOUR
THAT'LL GO FROM DRIVER AND
GREEN ROAD TO PLYMOUTH ROAD TO
HERE ON PARKWAY.
IT ADDS IF YOU'RE WANTING TO
TRAVEL DOWN THE NIXON CORRIDOR
IT'LL ADD ABOUT A MILE AND A
HALF AND ABOUT FIVE MINUTES TO
YOUR TRIP.
SO IT ADDS TIME TO IT BUT IT'S
NOT NOT AWFUL.
SO PHASE ONE, THE INTENT IS
THAT THAT SECTION WILL BE CLOSE
TO THROUGH TRAFFIC AND DURING
DURING THAT PROJECT AND IT'LL
BE OPENED UP AND THEN PHASE TWO
WHEN THAT PROJECT STARTS IT'LL
BE CLOSED THROUGH TRAFFIC AS
WELL AS IT WILL ALSO START UP
ONCE THAT'S COMPLETED AND THEN
PHASE THREE WOULD BE SHUT DOWN.
LOCAL RESIDENTS WILL STILL HAVE
ACCESS TO IT BUT IT WILL BE
LIMITED.
THE GOAL IS TO LIMIT IT TO
LOCAL ACCESS.
THERE'S GOING TO BE TIME FRAME
WHEN THERE COULD BE
INTERRUPTIONS TO THE LOCAL
ACCESS.
BUT CONTRACTORS GOAL IS TO
ALWAYS TRY TO MINIMIZE THAT
NEXT SLIDE.
I ACTUALLY SEE THAT WE HAVE A
QUESTION.
DO WE WANT TO TAKE QUESTIONS
NOW WE CAN PUT ERIC YEAH I.
>> I ACTUALLY LIVE ON THIS
SLIDE HERE.
>> I WAS WONDERING IF WE HAVE A
LOT OF CUT THROUGH TRAFFIC
ALREADY BRIAN CURRENTLY AS I
WAS WONDERING IF THERE WAS ANY
OPPORTUNITIES TO DO ANY KIND
OF LIKE SELECTIVE SPEED
MANAGEMENT OR ENFORCEMENT
DURING THIS PROJECT BECAUSE I
THINK A LOT OF THE RESIDENTS
ARE CONCERNED ABOUT PEOPLE
USING IT AS A WAY TO BYPASS
FROM GREEN TO WHATEVER PART
OF NIXON IS OPEN TO TIME.
>> WELL, SO THERE'S THERE'S
DEFINITELY OPPORTUNITIES TO
KIND OF TRYING TO ADDRESS THAT
.
WHAT WE'VE DONE IN OTHER
PROJECTS IS
WORK WITH AND OUR
POLICE AND ACTUALLY PUT OUT A
SPEED MANAGED OR SPEED IS IT A
RADAR GUN OR A I FORGET THE
TERMINOLOGY MAYBE LUKE
REMEMBERS BUT IT ACTUALLY IT'S
IT'S A RADAR DEVICE THAT
ACTUALLY PICKS UP AND TRACKS
THE SPEEDS UP AND THE NUMBER
OF VEHICLES.
SO ONE YOU CAN TRACK IF THERE'S
AN INCREASE IN VEHICLES AS WELL
AS THE SPEED OF THE VEHICLES
AND SO WE CAN KIND OF ONE
VALIDATE IF THAT'S ACTUALLY
OCCURRING AND TO SEE IF THERE'S
INCREASED SPEED AND IF THAT'S
THE CASE THEN WE CAN KIND OF DO
SOME MORE DEPLOYED ENFORCEMENT
AS WELL AS ADD MORE LIKE MAYBE
THERE'S ADDITIONAL TRAINING
LIKE FURNEAUX UP THROUGH
TRAFFIC, THAT TYPE OF THING.
SO THERE'S DIFFERENT TOOLS THAT
WE CAN DEPLOY IF WE'RE SEEING
TENDENCIES THAT AND THE OTHER
QUESTIONS KEEP MOVING.
>> LET'S KEEP MOVING THAT NEXT
SLIDE THEM SO THE MAINTENANCE
OF TRAFFIC OR TRAFFIC CONTROL I
MENTIONED BEFORE THE DETOUR
WILL REMAIN THE SAME FOR ALL
OF THE PHASES ONLY ONE SECTION
WILL BE CLOSED AT A TIME AND
WILL BE OPENED UP BEFORE THE
NEXT SECTION IS CLOSED.
GOAL IS TO MAINTAIN CONTINUOUS
LOCAL ACCESS TO HOMES IN THE
SCHOOLS BECAUSE THERE'S SEVERAL
SCHOOLS THAT ARE ALONG THIS
ROUTE AS WELL.
SAME THING WITH PEDESTRIAN AND
BICYCLE ACCESS WHAT WE TRY TO
BE MAINTAINED WHEN WHEN
FEASIBLE THERE'S GOING TO BE A
FEW TIMES WHEN THAT'LL BE THAT
WILL BE MORE DIFFICULT OR
THEY'LL BE TEMPORARY TYPE
CONSTRUCTION WORK THAT WILL
NEED TO BE DONE TO TRY TO
MAINTAIN THOSE IN PHASING WILL
BE COORDINATED WITH THE SCHOOLS
AND WITH THE SCHOOLS THAT ARE
ON SITE AND THE ANN ARBOR
PUBLIC SCHOOL OFFICIALS AS WELL
.
WE'VE HAD A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
MEETINGS WITH THE SCHOOLS AND
WE'RE GOING TO BE MEETING WE
DON'T HAVE IT SCHEDULED YET BUT
WE'RE GOING TO BE MEETING WITH
A PTO HERE COMING UP SOON TO
GIVE THEM UPDATE PROBABLY A
SIMILAR SLIDE PRESENTATION THIS
NEXT SLIDE.
SO I MENTIONED THE DATES, KEY
DATES.
THIS IS A TWO YEAR PROJECT WE
HOPED WE HOPE TO GET STARTED AS
EARLY AS WE CAN SO THAT WE CAN
GET CONSTRUCTION DONE THIS YEAR
BEFORE SCHOOL STARTS.
BUT THERE'S WE DON'T HAVE AN
AWARD YET ON THE PROJECT SO
WE'RE HOPING MID TO LATE MAY TO
START CONSTRUCTION FOR PHASE
ONE.
I HAVE A LATE AUGUST
CONSTRUCTION COMPLETION
STARTING IN MAY 2026 OR EARLIER
IF THE WEATHER WORKS AND THE
CONTRACTORS IS ABLE TO GET
GOING ON IT SO THAT WE CAN ALSO
AND THAT CONSTRUCTION IN LATE
SUMMER AND THEN BEGIN PHASE
THREE WHICH IS EXPECTED TO BE
COMPLETED IN DECEMBER OF 2026
NEXT SLIDE.
SO IN PART TO KEEP EVERYONE UP
TO DATE WILL BE DOING OTHER
COORDINATION INFORMATION AS
WELL.
BUT WE'RE GOING TO BE WE'VE
ADDED SOME INFORMATION TO THE
WEBSITE AND WE'LL CONTINUE TO
DO THAT AS WELL AS CONSTRUCTION
INFORMATION THAT WILL GO OUT I
BELIEVE WEEKLY AND PEOPLE CAN
CAN GO TO THE SITE AND CHECK
CHECK OUT THE STATUS AND IF
THERE'S ANY NEW INFORMATION WE
WOULD BE ASSISTING TO ADD THAT
TO THE TO THE WEBSITE
INFORMATION AND I'LL ADD TO
WHAT CHANCE YOU CAN ACTUALLY
SIGN UP ON THE WEBSITE HERE TO
THAT WEEKLY EMAIL LIST.
AND CURRENTLY WE HAVE ABOUT
EIGHTEEN HUNDRED PEOPLE SIGNED
UP ON THAT LIST SO OPEN UP TO
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS NEAR THE
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE PROJECT
TIMING OR DESIGN.
YEAH ERIC YEAH I JUST FORGOT TO
ASK A LOT OF THE BUS STOPS ON
THIS ROAD OR LIKE DIRT PATCHES
CURRENTLY ARE THOSE ALL GOING
TO BE BROUGHT UP TO LIKE
CONCRETE MAYBE SOME SEATING?
YES, NOW ALL THE BUSSES HAVE
BEEN COORDINATED OR BUS STOPS
AND COORDINATING WITH WITH
STAFF AT AT BEáTA AND ALSO A
NUMBER OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS UP
SPEED REDUCTION IS ONE OF THE
GOALS THAT WE'RE TRYING TO
ACHIEVE HERE BASED ON THE FIRST
COUPLE OF SLIDES.
SO WHAT IS OUR WHAT IS OUR
TARGET AND HOW ARE WE GOING TO
KNOW THAT WE DID OR DIDN'T MEET
IT WHEN WE'RE DONE OUR TARGET
SPEED LIMIT THAT'S A GREAT
QUESTION.
I FORGET EXACTLY WHAT OUR
DESIGN SPEED IS.
IT'S BEEN SO LONG SINCE I'VE
LOOKED AT PLANS.
DO YOU REMEMBER OFF THE TOP
OF YOUR HEAD, JOHN, WHAT ARE
DESIGNED TO BE AT THIRTY I I DO
NOT REMEMBER TWENTY FIVE I
BELIEVE IT WAS THIRTY BUT I I
DON'T REMEMBER EITHER.
>> WELL WHAT DO I MEAN WHAT IS
THE SPEED LIMIT NOW IS IT
THAT'S FUNNY AS JOHN IS LOOKING
THAT UP THE THE THE INTENT IS
TO FROM THE DESIGN WAS WAS
THROUGH THE USE OF THE
ROUNDABOUT'S AND THE GEOMETRY
THAT WE HAVE AND THE WIDTH AND
THE USE OF THE PAINT MARKINGS
WAS TO HELP SLOW THE VEHICLES
ALONG THE CORRIDOR DEFINITELY
IN COMPARISON TO THE WAY IT
DOES RIGHT NOW IT'S IT'S IT'S A
VERY WIDE OPEN AND STRAIGHT AND
AND IN TERMS OF MEASURING THAT
OBVIOUSLY IF WE GET PHONE CALLS
ABOUT THE SPEED AND THAT'S ONE
WAY JUST THE REPORTS OF IT.
BUT I ALSO BELIEVE THERE IS
SOME SOME FOLLOW UP DISCUSSIONS
ABOUT MAYBE DOING SOME VOLUMES
AND SPEED DATA GATHERING AT
DIFFERENT POINTS.
>> YEAH, I WOULD LIKE TO I
WOULD LIKE TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
ARE ABLE TO FOLLOW THROUGH ON
THAT DESIGN SPEED AND WE ARE
ABLE TO REALIZE THE THE
IMPROVEMENTS AND SPEED.
SO IF WE CAN PROGRAM IN AND
PLAN FOR SOME FOLLOW UP
MEASUREMENTS, I THINK THAT WE
THAT WOULD BE REALLY NICE TO
KNOW THAT WE'RE ON THE RIGHT
TRACK THAT OR THAT WE NEED TO
DO MORE.
SO ARE THE OTHER THE DESIGN
SPEED IS 35 MILES AN HOUR AND
THEN POST SPEED WILL BE THIRTY
MILES AN HOUR AND AND GOING
THROUGH THE ROUNDABOUTS PEOPLE
TYPICALLY ARE SLOWING DOWN
BELOW THAT.
SO BETWEEN THAT AND THE RAISED
CROSSWALKS THAT WILL THAT WILL
HELP THAT PROCESS.
>> LIKE CHRIS SAID, I THINK WE
WOULD AGREE THAT UNTIL THIS IS
IN PLACE, YOU KNOW, YOU DON'T
KNOW WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO GET.
>> OK, SO IS THAT NORMAL FOR
THE DESIGN SPEED TO BE HIGHER
THAN THE POSTED SPEED?
>> YEAH, YES.
THAT'S FOR SAFETY REASONS
SIMILAR TO WHERE LIKE ON A
FREEWAY YOU'LL HAVE A CURVE
WHERE THE DESIGN SPEED MAYBE 75
MILES AN HOUR BUT POSTED SPEED
OF 65 OR 60 IT'S JUST SAFETY
FACTOR.
>> WELL I GUESS I'D LIKE TO
ENCOURAGE DESIGN FEATURES THAT
THAT SLOW TRAFFIC DOWN SLOWER
THAN THIRTY FIVE MINUTES WOULD
BE MY PREFERENCE LIKE LIKE
LET'S HAVE NARROW LANES AND
VERTICAL ELEMENTS THAT MAKE
PEOPLE WANT TO DRIVE SLOWER
THAN THE SPEED.
THAT'S THE WAY THAT I THINK.
WELL GET TO OUR VISION ZERO
GOALS SO IT WOULD BE GOOD TO
CONSIDER THAT AND LIKE I SAID
MEASURE IT WHEN WE'RE DONE.
>> THANK YOU.
YOU KNOW, I DO HAVE ONE MORE
QUESTION IF YOU GUYS DON'T MIND
.
THE SIDEWALKS ARE GOING TO GO
THE WHOLE LENGTH LIKE WE DON'T
HAVE ANY GAPS LEFT WHEN WE'RE
DONE HERE.
WE'RE ALL THE WAY DOWN THE
SIDEWALK.
>> CORRECT.
OK, YEAH.
THERE SHOULD BE SIDEWALKS
CONNECTIONS THROUGHOUT.
ZOBER THANK YOU, ERIC.
>> YEAH, I JUST WANTED TO MAKE
A COMMENT THAT THIS SLIDE IN
PARTICULAR IS REALLY EXCITING
TO ME PERSONALLY BECAUSE WHERE
IT SHOWS THAT IN OUR
DEVELOPMENT THERE WHAT THEY'RE
DOING IS THEY'RE MOVING THEIR
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL.
LOGAN FROM THE TOP HALF OF THE
SLIDE TO THE BOTTOM HALF OF A
SLIDE.
THAT MEANS ALL THE KIDS THAT GO
TO LOGAN THAT WALK WILL BE
WALKING FROM THE TOP HALF
OF THE SLIDE TO THE BOTTOM
OF THE SLIDE.
ALL OF THEM HAVE TO CROSS NIXON
TO GET TO LOGAN AND A LOT
OF KIDS WALK FROM THE TOP TO
THE BOTTOM TO CLAG CURRENTLY IN
THIS AREA PARTICULAR IS
EXTREMELY YOU KNOW, HIT OR MISS
RIGHT NOW AS FAR AS CROSSING
NIXON.
SO HAVING THE RAISED CROSSWALKS
HERE AT THE APEX DEVELOPMENT
ALONG WITH THE THE ROUNDABOUT I
YOU GUYS DID A REALLY, REALLY
GOOD JOB WITH THAT AND I'M VERY
THANKFUL THAT YOU PRIORITIZED
THAT IN APPRECIATE THAT IN
RETROSPECT IT WAS KIND OF NICE
THAT WE WERE ABLE TO SHELVE
THIS AND HAVE SOME TIME FOR
THIS PROJECT TO KIND OF SET
BECAUSE IN THAT TIME FRAME
OTHER AND OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS
HAD ALL THESE OTHER PROJECTS
THAT CAME
ONLINE AND OTHER
THINGS DEVELOPED AND WHEN WE
DID PULL THIS OFF THE SHELVES
AND WE'RE READY TO KIND
OF START IMPLEMENTING THIS
NEXEN PROJECT ALL OF A SUDDEN
THERE ARE THESE OTHER FACTORS,
THESE OTHER PROJECTS THAT CAME
ONLINE, THE SCHOOLS WERE MOVING
RIGHT.
AND SO ALL OF SUDDEN THESE
THINGS WEREN'T AS BIG OF AN
ISSUE IN TWENTY NINETEEN.
NOW THEY'RE A BIG ISSUE AND SO
WE WERE ABLE TO ACCOMMODATE
THOSE TWEAKS, THOSE CHANGES NOW
SO AGREED I THINK IT WAS A
PERFECT OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE
THOSE IMPROVEMENTS AND
COORDINATE THAT WITH THE
SCHOOLS IMPROVEMENTS IN
PARTICULAR I THINK IT WAS PHASE
THREE IT WAS THERE THAT BLOCK
CROSSWALK.
YES, RIGHT HERE.
SO WOULD THAT HAVE RFP OR SOME
KIND OF FLASHING LIGHTS OR
SOMETHING ON IT ON THIS ONE I
DON'T BELIEVE ROSE TO THAT
LEVEL.
SO I THINK IT HAS THE MARKINGS
AND THE SCIENCE ON THIS ONE.
>> I JUST I MAYBE ERIC KNOWS
THE AREA BETTER BUT DO YOU
ANTICIPATE THAT BEING USED FOR
KIDS WALKING TO THE NEW LOGAN
OR KLEGG?
I DON'T THINK SO.
I THINK MOST OF THE KIDS ARE
GOING TO CROSS AT THAT
ROUNDABOUT THAT'S TO THE SOUTH
OF THIS ONE THING THAT
NEIGHBORS HAVE EXPRESSED A
LITTLE BIT OF CONCERN ABOUT AT
THIS MID BLOCK CROSSWALK IS
THAT IT'S UPHILL TO THE LEFT IS
DOWNHILL TO THE RIGHT IS UPHILL
AND SO SOME PEOPLE ARE A LITTLE
BIT CONCERNED ABOUT THIS
CROSSWALK WITH LIMITED SIGHT
LINES BECAUSE THERE'S RATHER
LARGE TREES ON THE EAST AND
WEST SIDES OF THE ROAD.
SO IT MAY BE SOMETHING THAT WE
HAVE TO REEVALUATE DOWN THE
ROAD.
YEAH, I THINK THIS IF I
REMEMBER ORIGINALLY THIS WAS AN
AREA WHERE THERE WAS GOING TO
BE ANOTHER ROUND ABOUT WHAT
PUBLIC OPINION WAS PRETTY
NEGATIVE ON THAT.
SO IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN THEY TOOK
THE FOURTH AND FIFTH
ROUNDABOUTS AWAY.
THAT'S CORRECT.
THERE IS BY HAVING THE BIKE
LANES AT ARGONNE YOU ARE ABLE
TO KIND OF PULL OUT A LITTLE
BIT AND HAVE IMPROVED
SIGHTLINES AND THEN WITH THE
IMPROVED VERTICAL PROFILE ON
THAT ROAD AS YOU GO FROM
ARGONNE TO THE NORTH WE'RE ABLE
TO IMPROVE THE SIGHT LINE
VERTICAL SIGHT LINE ON THAT
TOO.
>> SO THERE ARE JUST LITTLE
TWEAKS HERE AND THERE THAT
SHOULD IMPROVE THE SAFETY AND
THE LINES WITHOUT CUTTING DOWN
THE TREES IN THAT AREA.
THANKFULLY.
AND THE OTHER QUESTIONS
COMMENTS I WILL LOOK FORWARD TO
A SIMILAR CONSTRUCTION AND
SEEING HOW IT ALL TURNS OUT AT
THE END OF NEXT WITH AND JOHN
MYSELF WILL BE PRIME CONTACTS.
IF ANYBODY DOES HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS OR IN CONSTRUCTION
FEEL FREE TO REACH OUT.
THANK YOU FOR ALLOWING US TO
PRESENT.
YEAH.
THANKS TO THE TEAM FOR COMING
BY.
>> I APPRECIATE IT.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP OUR STAFF REPORT AND
UPDATES LOOK IF YOU WOULD MIND
ALL RIGHT.
>> FROM YOUR CHAIR YOU HAVE
STEVE'S APOLOGY.
THERE ARE SOME EDITORIAL WORK
THAT'S NOT PROPERLY DONE
BECAUSE THAT WILL STILL GO OVER
THE DOCUMENT AND FOR OUR FINAL
VERSION WE'LL MAKE THOSE
CORRECTIONS AND AND TO FINALIZE
THIS CORRECTLY THE VERY FIRST
THIS IS A ONE OF THOSE ERRORS.
THIS ONE IS TALKING ABOUT NORTH
MAIN STREET TRANSPORTATION
STUDY.
>> SO THE UPDATE IS CAPTURED
HERE STARTED FINISH BECAUSE I
CAN INTERVIEW OVER THE PAST TWO
WEEKS AND HAVE MADE A
RECOMMENDATION FOR THE
SELECTION OF THE DESIGN TEAM
LED BY TOOL DESIGN GROUP AND
THAT IS STAFF IS WORKING ON
COUNCIL CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL
PROCESS.
SO THIS IS HEADED FOR CITY
COUNCIL FOR ORGANIZATION AND
THAT'S ONE FOR A STATE TRUNK
LINE TRANSVERSE STUDY OR
NEGOTIATION.
THIS ONE HAS RECEIVED A SLIGHT
MOVEMENTS FORWARD ON AND IN THE
CITY.
THE NEGOTIATION TEAMS HAVE
SCHEDULED FOR THEIR FIRST
MEETING THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN
NEXT WEEK.
>> MICRO MOBILITY RIGHT NOW WE
ARE IN THE EXTENSION FOR THE
SERVICE FROM SPIN AND CITY
ATTORNEY'S OFFICE IS WORKING ON
A DRAFT AGREEMENT AND THE HOPE
IS TO HAVE THAT AGREEMENT
FINALIZED AND APPROVED BEFORE
THE END OF JUNE OF THIS YEAR.
MOVING ON TO TALK ABOUT THE
ROAD SAFETY AUDIT WHICH IS IN
THE AREA OF LEGAL AVENUE AND
ST. CATHERINE STREET AND TO THE
DENHA PICTURE.
SO THIS IS AN AREA WHERE WE
HAVE SERIOUS INJURY CRASHES AT
THE INTERSECTION OF GLADDENED
AND CONSISTENTLY A COUPLE
OF TIMES OVER THE PAST FEW
YEARS AND THE CITY RECEIVED A
GRANT AWARD FOR THE ROAD SAFETY
AUDIT PORTION AS WELL AS A
FUTURE CONSTRUCTION PORTION IN
THIS GENERAL AREA.
SO THE ROAD SAFETY OF WORK IS
BEING DONE AT THIS MOMENT
BECAUSE ALREADY SPENT SOME TIME
IN THE FIELD AND WE'RE WAITING
FOR THEIR RECOMMENDATION AND
THE RESULTS TO COME BACK AND
THAT'S GOING TO PROVIDE INPUT
TO THE DESIGN OF MITIGATION
MEASURES AND THE FURTHER ALONG
INTO THE CONSTRUCTION THE THE
TIMING OF THE CONSTRUCTION
DOLLARS IS RIGHT NOW SCHEDULED
FOR FISCAL YEAR TWENTY TWENTY
NINE.
>> MOVING ON TO TALK ABOUT
DESIGN PROJECTS THERE SIDEWALL
GAP PROJECTS CURRENTLY IN
DESIGN WE HAVE BROCKMANN AND
CROSLAND.
THE NEXT PUBLIC MEETING FOR
THIS PROJECT IS SCHEDULED TO BE
APRIL 29 AND INFORMATION CAN BE
FOUND ON THE PROJECT WEB PAGE
CONSTRUCTION IS ANTICIPATED TO
BE IN TWENTY TWENTY SIX K THE
APPLE AND PEAR AREA.
THIS ONE DESIGN HAS JUST
ASTARTE OK RIGHT DEXTER AVENUE
FROM MAYPO TO IRONWOOD THIS ONE
IS ALONG AS WITH MANY OTHER
CAPITAL PROJECTS WE MOVE THEM
OVER TO THE CITY ENGAGE WEBSITE
AND THE CONSTRUCTION IS ALSO
SCHEDULED FOR TWENTY TWENTY SIX
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO THERE'S A LITTLE BIT
OF EDITORIAL ISSUES HERE WAS
THIS TOPIC BUT OVERALL FOR SAFE
STREET FOR I'LL GRANT THIS
GRANT IS SUPPORTING TWO
PROJECTS AND ONE OF THEM IS THE
NEAR MISS ANALYTICS PROCESS
THAT ONE HAS ALREADY RECEIVED
ENVIRONMENTAL APPROVAL FROM
FEDERAL HIGHWAY AND THE CITY IS
MOVING ALONG WITH THE TEAM LED
BY AMPHORAE.
THAT'S THE UNIVERSE OF MICHIGAN
TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH
INSTITUTE SO THAT PRODUCT WILL
MOVE AHEAD.
THERE'S ANOTHER PORTION OF BIKE
LANE CONSTRUCTION AND SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM THAT IS ALSO
SUPPORTED BY SAVE STREET FOR
ALL AND THIS PORTION DENHA HAS
NOT CLEARED THE ENVIRONMENTAL
REVIEW PROCESS AND RIGHT NOW WE
WE ARE STILL WAITING FOR THAT
PROCESS.
SO STAFF IS CLOSELY
COORDINATING WITH FEDERAL
HIGHWAY BUT THERE IS A DELAY IN
THE SCHEDULE AND A COUPLE
OF WEEKS AGO BEFORE THE END
OF MARCH STAFFING ISSUES STOP
WORK ORDER FOR THIS PORTION
OF THE PROGRAM NORTH UNIVERSITY
DESIGN ON THIS PROJECT IS THE
CONSTRUCTION IS GOING TO HAPPEN
IN TWENTY TWENTY SIX AND THERE
WILL BE A PRESENTATION TO THE
COMMISSION IN JUNE OF THIS YEAR
.
SIMILARLY FOR PACKERS STREET IS
UNDER DESIGN RIGHT NOW AND
THERE WILL BE A PRESENTATION ON
THIS PROJECT NEXT MONTH TALKING
ABOUT CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS THE
TWENTY FORTY FIVE FOR STREET
RESURFACING PROJECT.
THAT PROJECT IS CURRENTLY
UNDERWAY AND WILL CONTINUE INTO
FALL.
>> THERE ARE SIDEWALK GAP
FILLING PROJECT THAT'S ALREADY
HAPPENING INDEPENDENCE WHATEVA
SEQUOIA SEQUOIA PARKWAY AND
WHITEWOOD STREET MANOR AVENUE
CONSTRUCTION THAT'S ALSO
UNDERWAY AND THIS PROJECT WILL
CONTINUE INTO THE NOVEMBER
OF THIS YEAR STATE STREET FROM
SOUTH UNIVERSITY TO
CHANGE
OF THE CROSS SECTION AND
INCLUDE A TRANSIT ONLY LANE
CONSTRUCTION IS SCHEDULED TO
START IN A FEW WEEKS OR NEXT
MONTH.
WE JUST HEARD ABOUT DETAILS
ABOUT THE NEXT ROAD
CONSTRUCTION HAULING WATER MAIN
AND RESURFACING CONSTRUCTION IS
IS UNDERWAY AND IS SCHEDULED TO
BE COMPLETED IN AUGUST
.
PITTSFIELD, THE VILLAGE
IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION IS
RIGHT NOW UNDERWAY AND WILL
CONTINUE INTO THE NOVEMBER
OF THIS YEAR AND PHASE TWO
OF THE PROJECT WILL THEN START
FROM THE SPRING OF NEXT YEAR.
I DO SEE WE HAVE A QUESTION FOR
JUST A QUICK QUESTION ON THE
STATE STREET.
>> DOES THAT INCLUDE A
PROTECTED BIKE LANE?
I KNOW WE HAVE ONE AT STATE
RIGHT UP UNTIL MAYBE A BLOCK
FROM WILLIAM.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT WAS
INCLUDED IN THAT DESIGN OR NOT
.
IT IS A COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO WE
HAD A PRESENTATION FROM ALSO
WOOD TRIM ON THAT THAT
SACRAMENTO STREET.
>> SO IT DOES INCLUDE A
PROTECTED BICYCLE FACILITY
THERE.
>> RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
FIFTH AVENUE RESURFACING FROM
WILLIAM TO MADISON.
THIS IS THE PROJECT WE TALKED
ABOUT TO THE COMMISSION LAST
MONTH THAT'S GOING TO INSTALL
THE CITY'S FIRST THE CONTRAFLOW
BIKE LANE STAFFY CHECK WITH
OTHER OR PUBLIC WORKS ARM
OF THE CITY AND RECEIVED
FAVORABLE FEEDBACK REGARDING
WINTER MAINTENANCE REGARDING
SORT OF WASTE AND THE
RECYCLING.
SO IT'S VERY LIKELY THE
CONTRAFLOW BIKE LANE WAS
PROTECTION BY FLOATING PARKING
.
THAT'S GOING TO BE THE THE NEW
CROSS SECTION FOR NOT THE
ENTIRE LENGTH BUT IT'S FROM
WILLIAM TO PACARD.
CONSTRUCTION IS ALREADY
UNDERWAY AND IT'S GOING TO BE
FINISHED BY FALL OR JULY
OF THIS YEAR.
>> WE DIDN'T HAVE A LOT
OF UPDATE FOR THE THIS YEAR
MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES
PROJECT THE DISCUSSION FOR
WANTING AND HARDENING OUR
SECTION HAS WRAPPED UP STAFFING
IS GOING TO PROCEED WITH
CONVERTING THE INTERSECTION TO
ALWAYS STOP AND REALIGNMENT
OF THE CROSSWALK FOR CROSSING
HARTING.
>> WE RECEIVED THE REQUEST TO
LOOK INTO LANE CLOSURE AND THE
MAINTAINING OF TRAFFIC DURING A
RECENT LANE CLOSURE ON PACKARD
ROAD FROM MARLBOROUGH DRIVE TO
PINE VALLEY BOULEVARD.
SO THERE ARE SEVERAL PROJECTS
IN CITY DOES HAVE HIS OWN TO
SEE.
IT DID HAVE ITS OWN CAPITAL
PROJECT OVER THERE FROM MARCH
24TH TO THE TWENTY EIGHTH THIS
PROJECT DID NOT INVOLVE
IMPACTING SIDEWALKS OR
CROSSWALK BUT WE DID HAVE
PRIVATE DEVELOPER PROJECTS
NEARBY.
SO IN THE REVIEW OF MAINTAINING
TRAFFIC FOR EITHER CAPITAL
PROJECTS OR PRIVATE PROJECTS,
APPLE PAY CLOSER ATTENTION ON
THE MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC FOR
NOT MOTORIZED USERS.
>> UM, NEXT ONE THIS IS
ACTUALLY TWO TOPICS.
THE FIRST ONE IS TRAFFIC SAFETY
CORRIDOR AND AN EFFORT BY A
NUMBER OF POLICE DEPARTMENT
PUBLIC SERVICES AND
ENGINEERING.
WE'RE WORKING ON SCIENCE
RELATION TO CONVEY THE
INFORMATION TO MOTORISTS AND
OTHER USERS ABOUT THE
ENFORCEMENT AND EDUCATION, THE
ENCOURAGEMENT ALONG THREE
CORRIDORS PACARD, WASHTENAW AND
JACKSON HAVE THE REST OF THE
PARAGRAPH BELONGS TO A
DIFFERENT TOPIC.
THIS IS ABOUT THE HAS THE
ENFORCEMENT OF BIKE LANE.
THIS ONE WILL PROBABLY NEED TO
FOLLOW UP AND PROVIDE A BETTER
RESPONSE NEXT MONTH.
WE'RE WAITING FOR SOME INPUT
FROM ACTING COMMANDER MIKE
SURABI ON THE SPEED IS ACTUALLY
WORKING ON THIS TOPIC
STREETLIGHT OUTSIDE CONVERSION
PROJECT THE CITY AND STATE
GRANT GRANT A GRANT AGREEMENT
IS NEAR COMPLETION SO HE HAS
ALREADY STARTED THE PROCUREMENT
OF MATERIALS FOR THIS PROJECT
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
>> SMART SECTION PROJECT.
THIS IS ONE OF OUR PROJECTS IN
THAT CONNECTED VEHICLE
TECHNOLOGY WORLD.
THIS PROJECT IS IS WRAPPING UP
AND THE OVERALL EFFORT IS
TRANSITIONING INTO THE NEXT
PHASE OF THIS SERIES
OF PROJECTS.
THE NEXT ONE WILL BE CALLED THE
KNOPPER CONNECTED ENVIRONMENT
VERSION TWO.
>> SO THE APPLICATION IS BEING
LOOKED AT AS PART OF THE THIS
CURRENT ONE SMARTIE
INTERSECTION PROJECT IS
TRANCE'S TAKENO PRIORITY THAT
IS THE TESTING OF THE
APPLICATION AND TRANSITIONING
INTO THE NEIGHBOR CONNECTING
ENVIRONMENT THE UPCOMING
PROJECT WILL LOOK INTO
EMERGENCY VEHICLE PREEMPTION
FOR A STREETLIGHT
IMPLEMENTATION AND AS OF MARCH
18TH HE HAS COMPLETED THE
REPAIRS.
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIVE
STREETLIGHTS SO FAR IN THIS
CALENDAR YEAR THEY NEIGHBORHOOD
TRAFFIC CALMING PROGRAM.
WE STAND IN THE SAME CONDITION
AS LAST MONTH'S REPORT IN TERMS
OF WHICH ONES ARE UNDER
CONSTRUCTION AND WHICH ONES ARE
AND ARE THE ENGAGEMENT PHASE AS
WE PREPARE IN GOING INTO THE
NEW FISCAL YEAR THERE WILL BE A
NEW THERE WILL BE NEW FUNDING
AVAILABLE FOR TRAFFIC CALMING
AND WE ARE LOOKING TO KICK OFF
OUR FIRST NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC
CALMING APPROACH MEANING IT'S
GOING TO COVER A COUPLE
OF STREETS IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
RATHER THAN JUST A ONE IN YOUR
STREET THAT WE HAVE HAD IN THE
PAST
.
ALL RIGHT.
FOR EDUCATION, THE
ENCOURAGEMENT THERE WILL BE A
BIKE TO WHEREVER THEY MARCH FOR
AND HOW MAY 14TH OUR CITY STAFF
ARE PARTNERING WITH WALK BIKE
WASHTENAW AND GET DOWNTOWN FOR
THIS EVENT LIKE THAT MOVIE DOWN
TO TALKING ABOUT CONVERTING OUR
TRAFFIC SIGNALS TO CANCEL
FLASHING YELLOW ARROW DURING
PEDESTRIAN ACTUATION.
WE NEED TO FINISH A COUPLE
OF MINOR SECTIONS THIS MONTH
GADIS AND PARKWAY AND OBVIOUSLY
EISENHOWER, EISENHOWER AND
INDUSTRIAL AND PARK AND IN
PLYMOUTH.
SO WE NEED SOME WE MAY NOT HAVE
HAD ACTIVITIES AT ALL THESE
LAST FOUR WE DO SOME
VERIFICATION ON THIS.
I HAVE FOUR PARKED IN PLYMOUTH.
IT WAS ALREADY OPERATING IN A
DESIRED FASHION SO WE MOVE TO
THE INTERSECTION OF AND WE ALSO
ADDED NOTES FOR THE REMAINING
INTERSECTIONS FOR INTERSECTION
THAT DO NOT HAVE PUSHBUTTONS
WHERE WE ARE GOING TO PLAN BY
THE INSTALLATION.
BUT THESE THIS GROUP MIGHT BE
OF A LONGER TIME FRAME FOR PUSH
BUTTONS TO BE INSTALLED AND
CONVERTED OVER.
THERE ARE TWO INTERSECTIONS WE
ARE WAITING FOR THE CONTROLLER
FIRMWARE TO BE FINALIZED RIGHT
NOW WE ARE HAVING VERSION FIVE
POINT SEVEN BETA ONCE THE
FIRMWARE IS FINALIZED WE'RE
READY TO CONVERT THESE TO THE
LAST ONE HERE ON PARKWAY AND
HERERA DRIVE THIS ONE.
IT SHOULD HAVE BEEN DONE TODAY
BUT IT'S JUST IT'S PENDING THAT
THE CHANGE BECAUSE WE DIDN'T
HAVE COMMUNICATION THE LINES
WERE DOWN AND WE ARE GOING TO
SEND STAFF OUT TO THE FIELD TO
COMPLETE THE WORK.
THE SECOND FROM BOTTOM FOR E
MEDICAL CENTER E HOSPITAL THIS
IS YOUR SIGNAL SO STAFF WILL
NEED TO COORDINATE WITH THE
UNIVERSITY FOR THEIR APPROVAL
BEFORE MAKING THE CHANGE.
ALL RIGHT.
I DO SEE QUESTIONS RACHEL, I
APOLOGIZE.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THIS WHAT
THIS GROUP MEANS THE PREVIOUS
GROUP THANK YOU.
FLASHING YELLOW ARROW IF THIS
IS THE ONE YOU'RE REFERRING TO
SO FLASHING YELLOW ARROW ALLOWS
THE PERMISSIVE LEFT TURN AND
DURING THAT PHASE THE DRIVER,
THE LEFT TURN AND DRIVER WILL
HAVE TO YIELD TO ONCOMING
TRAFFIC INCLUDING ONCOMING
MOTOR VEHICLES, ONCOMING
BICYCLISTS AND PEDESTRIANS
USING THE CROSSWALK.
THIS IS AN OPERATION THAT'S
ALLOWED BY THE COMMUNITY, SAID
BUT IT DOES REPRESENT CONFLICTS
FOR NON MOTORIZED USERS AND
EXPOSURE TO CRASHES.
SO WE ARE UNDER THE DIRECTION
AND RECOMMENDATION FROM THIS
COMMISSION AND WE'RE MAKING
CHANGES SO THAT AT HALFWAY
INTERSECTIONS WHEN WE RECEIVE
PEDESTRIAN ACTUATION WE DISABLE
WITH A FLASHING YELLOW PORTION.
>> THANK YOU.
YOU KNOW THE I GUESS I'M
WONDERING DO WE HAVE CAPTURED
IN OUR UPCOMING BUDGET THE WHAT
WE NEED
IN ORDER TO GET THE
PUSHBUTTONS WE DO WE DO HAVE
PUSHBUTTONS LIKE THE PUSH THE
HARDWARE IS NOT THE CRITICAL
ITEM IN GETTING THESE DONE SO
IF WE THINK ABOUT COPYING OUR
SANCTIONS ON HERE ON IS GOING
TO INVOLVE THE APPROVAL AND
SOME OTHER TIMES IT'S THE THE
KIRP RAMP WORK THE CONCRETE
WORK THAT THAT MAY BE IN A WAY
SO WE AND IN THAT WE WE DO NOT
CURRENTLY HAVE A PROJECT FOR
FOR THE CONCRETE WORK BUT THAT
IS SOMETHING STIFLER'S IS
WORKING ON IS SOMETHING WE CAN
ASK FOR IN THIS CURRENT BUDGET
CYCLE I GUESS IS WHEN I WAS
GETTING LIKE WHERE CAN WE MAKE
SURE THAT IT'S IN OUR UPCOMING
BUDGET ON ABSOLUTELY THIS I
THINK IT MAKES MORE SENSE IF WE
MAKE ANOTHER STEP GOING DEEPER
INTO THE ASK AS TO THE AMOUNT
AND BECAUSE SOME OF THESE
INTERSECTIONS THEY THEY MAY
NEED TO WORK FOR ONE CORNER
OF THE INTERSECTION AND SOME
OTHERS MAY NEED MULTIPLE
CORNERS.
>> SO AND IN TERMS OF THE
BALLPARK OF COST, THE SIGNAL
EQUIPMENT IS WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT SOMEWHERE BETWEEN 8000 TO
10000 DOLLARS PER INTERSECTION
.
THE THE CONCRETE WORK IF WE ARE
TALKING ABOUT ALL THE CORNERS
THAT COULD BE THE UPWARDS
OF FORTY THOUSAND DOLLARS PER
INTERSECTION.
>> SO THAT'S THE GENERAL
BALLPARK RELATIVITY AND ALSO
THE GENERAL NUMBERS WHERE WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT SO YEAH, I THINK
THIS IS ITEM WHERE STAFF CAN
PROVIDE MORE DETAILED
INFORMATION AND THEN DECIDE IF
IT MAKES SENSE TO MAKE THIS
INTO A BUDGET REQUEST.
IS IT POSSIBLE THAT, YOU KNOW,
SOME OF THESE INTERSECTIONS
WOULD BE SO DIFFICULT OR SO
EXPENSIVE TO DO IN THE THAT IN
THE MEANWHILE WE WOULD WANT TO
JUST CANCEL THE FLASHING YELLOW
ARROW ALTOGETHER LIKE JUST TURN
OFF THAT FUNCTIONALITY UNTIL WE
ARE ABLE TO DO IT SAFELY?
I IN MY PREFERENCE WOULD BE
JUST TO GET THE BUTTONS IN AND
GET THIS DONE.
BUT IF WE GET TO THE POINT
WHERE WE'RE STUCK THEN THAT'S
AN ALTERNATIVE THAT I THINK WE
HAVE OR THAT WE COULD EVALUATE
WHY IS IT TRUE OR NOT?
>> TECHNICALLY IT'S IT'S
ENTIRELY FEASIBLE THAT I'M YEAH
I'M AFRAID I MAY NOT BE ABLE TO
PROVIDE A RESPONSE THIS MOMENT.
THERE ARE SEVERAL OTHER
IMPLICATIONS THAT STAFF WILL
NEED TO ASSURE US AND GOT BACK
TO YOU ON THAT THAT MAKES TOTAL
SENSE THAT THERE WOULD BE LOTS
OF DETAILS TO THAT DOG.
>> BUT I'D LIKE TO PUT THAT OUT
THERE LIKE IF WE'RE NOT ABLE TO
DO IT SAFELY THEN LET'S JUST
NOT DO IT UNTIL WE GET THE
HARDWARE WE NEED.
THANK YOU FOR ALL YOUR EFFORTS
ON THIS AND EVERYTHING ELSE.
LUKE, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
IT'S BEEN VERY NICE WORKING
WITH YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR THE ADVICE AND
THE THE DIRECTIONS SET BY THE
WHOLE COMMISSION.
>> SORRY I I'M NOT THAT YET.
MOVIE ON TO TALK ABOUT ANOTHER
PORTION OF THE UPDATE I'M
TALKING ABOUT NOT MOTORIZED
USER CRASHES FOR PEDESTRIAN
RELATED CRASHES.
WE HAD TWO AND ONE OF THEM IS A
FATAL INJURY THAT IS THE ONE
THAT OCCURRED ON PLYMOUTH ROAD
BETWEEN THE GREEN AND U.S.
TWENTY THREE OFF RAMP WE HAD
ANOTHER PILAU INJURY CRASH LAST
MONTH.
THERE WAS NOT ANY BICYCLE
BICYCLE INVOLVED CRASH THAT'S
REPORTED IN MARCH.
OK, SO THAT COMPLETES A STAFF
UPDATES.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
LIAISON REPORTS ANY
COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE IS ON
TO ANOTHER BODY OR
ORGANIZATION.
ANY BRIEF SUMMARIES OR UPDATES
OF THIS TIME?
YEAH, ONE TOUGH TO FOLLOW UP
THAT NOTIFICATION ABOUT TAISHAN
REALLY SORRY TO HEAR ABOUT THAT
BUT THE PLANNING COMMISSION
SIDE JUST WANTED TO GIVE
EVERYBODY A HEADS UP THAT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS STILL
UNDERWAY AND THEN THERE ARE THE
DRAFT IS AVAILABLE FOR
EVERYONE'S COMMENTS I THINK
BECAUSE THE VISION ZERO PLAN
WAS RECENTLY UPDATED THAT
ACTUALLY WON'T BE UPDATED BUT
LAND USE AND OTHER ITEMS WILL
BE UPDATED AND SO JUST HEADS UP
THERE'S AN OPEN HOUSE AT WEST
GATE LIBRARY ON APRIL TWENTY
FOURTH AND THEN THERE'S ANOTHER
MEETING ON APRIL 30TH MALLETS
CREEK LIBRARY.
THESE ARE BOTH FROM THREE TO
SEVEN P.M. AS WELL AS THAT
TRAVER HOOD TREVOR WARD FROM
MAY 7TH THREE TO SEVEN O'CLOCK.
AND SO IT'S INTENDED TO BE KIND
OF AN OPEN HOUSE TYPE FORMAT
AND THEN ALSO YOU'RE WELCOME TO
COME SPEAK AT PLANNING
COMMISSION AS WELL.
WE ARE STARTING THEM AT FIVE
THIRTY GIVEN HOW LENGTHY THE
PUBLIC COMMENTS HAVE BECOME.
WE DON'T LOVE MEETINGS GOING
TILL ONE A.M. SO SO WE ARE
STARTING AT A LITTLE EARLY AND
THEN THE OTHER ONE THAT I
WANTED TO ALSO PUT ON YOUR
RADAR IS THAT THE THE SITE
PLANNED FOR TWENTY EIGHT FORTY
FIVE STATE STREET WHICH IS
ARBER S WAS SEEN YESTERDAY AND
POSTPONED TO JUNE BUT THERE ARE
SOME TRANSPORTATION ELEMENTS
THAT COULD BE OF INTEREST TO
THIS GROUP.
THERE'S SOME MATERIAL REGARDING
BIKE LANE ADDITIONS LIKE
COMPLETING BIKE LANES AND THEN
ALSO SOME ADDITIONAL
COORDINATOR WITH THE RTA AND
ADDING EXTERIOR BUS STOPS.
SO THERE'S A FEW ENGINEERING
ITEMS.
IT SOUNDS LIKE IT'S BEEN KICKED
TO ARE POSTPONED UNTIL JUNE
17TH IS MY UNDERSTANDING AT
THIS TIME.
BUT IT'S IT'S A FAIRLY SIZABLE
PROJECT INVOLVING MY FORMER
EMPLOYER.
SO I WANTED TO GIVE EVERYBODY A
HEADS UP ON THAT ONE.
>> OTHER THAN THAT, PLEASE
PARTICIPATE IN THE COMPLAN.
WE WANT TO HEAR FROM EVERYBODY.
SO THAT IS I THINK ALL I GOT
FOR NOW.
THANK YOU.
THANKS FOR DOING THE IRS
PROJECT ON OUR LONG TERM AGENDA
THIS IS SOMETHING WE'LL LOOK AT
LATER THIS YEAR.
WE'LL BE NOR ELSE DERMO THIS IS
WHERE I REPORT OUT COUNCIL
STUFF BUT THE LAST COUNCIL
MEETING WE UNANIMOUSLY PASSED A
RESOLUTION THAT WAS REALLY
ABOUT ALIGNING CITY OPERATIONS
WITH VISION ZERO AND THE TWENTY
THIRTY VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED
REDUCTION TARGETS AND IN PART
THE INSPIRATION FOR THIS
RESOLUTION CAME FROM THE
RESOLUTION PASSED BY THIS BODY
AND IN RELATION TO WORKING
CLOSELY WITH THE SCHOOLS AND
SOME OF THEIR SITE PLANS WHERE
THEY INTERACT WITH PUBLIC
RIGHTS AWAY AND I THINK WHAT I
TOOK AWAY FROM AN INFORMATIONAL
MEETING THAT WE HAD THIS
COMMISSION ABOUT IT WAS THAT
THERE'S NOT CONSISTENCY THROUGH
EVERY LEVEL OF THE CITY
OPERATIONS WHEN COMES TO WHAT
WE'RE TRYING TO ACHIEVE.
OBVIOUSLY THERE ARE IN MANY YOU
KNOW, WE HEARD A LOT ABOUT A
HUGE PROJECT THAT'S BEING DONE
THAT'S OBVIOUSLY TAKEN THESE
TWO GOALS SERIOUSLY.
BUT THIS IS REALLY ABOUT
ALIGNING THROUGHOUT ALL UNITS
AND I LINKING TO MY NEWSLETTER
YOU GUYS CAN FIND IT ONLINE
FROM THE LAST AGENDA ALIGNING
ALL OF THE CITY UNITS ALONG
THESE GOALS.
THEY TOUCH TRANSPORTATION AND
SORRY MAKING SURE THAT EACH
PLAN THAT TOUCHES
TRANSPORTATION EXPLICITLY
ADDRESSES HOW HOW IT HOW IT
ADDRESSES STATES, HOW IT
ADDRESSES MEETING THE VMT AND
THE VISION ZERO GOALS AND THAT
OUR ANNUAL BUDGET EXPLICITLY
REFLECTS AND SUPPORTS THESE
PLANS SO THAT WOULD BE
OF INTEREST TO THIS GROUP AND I
CONTINUE TO WORK ON LOTEN THE
ONE PLAN THAT ACTUALLY
INTERSECTS WITH THE CITY PARK.
SO HOPEFULLY I HAVE MORE
NEWS ON THAT SOON.
THANK YOU.
NO ONE ELSE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
NEXT SUBCOMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS ANYONE HAS AN
UPDATE OR REPORT THEY WANT TO
SHARE LOTS OF TIME.
AS MENTIONED EARLIER, LUKAS
HEADING OUT TO A DIFFERENT
POSITION OUTSIDE THE CITY
UNFORTUNATELY HERE.
BUT I REALLY WANT TO THANK HIM.
HE STEPPED IN SO INCREDIBLY
ADMIRABLY WHEN WHEN RAYMOND
LEFT THE DEPARTMENT AND SALUKI
I JUST THINK HE'D DONE AN
ABSOLUTELY AMAZING JOB SINCE
LAST YEAR WHEN YOU JUST
SEAMLESSLY STEPPED IN AND AND
MADE US MISS RAYMOND A LOT LESS
CERTAINLY.
BUT NOW YOU'VE DONE A FANTASTIC
JOB.
SO THANK SO MUCH LOOKING AND
GOOD LUCK TO WHERE YOU'RE GOING
NEXT AND I KNOW WORK WELL AS
CYNTHIA AS WELL BUT THANKS
THANKS A LOT.
BUT YOU'VE GOT TO COOPERATE
WITH THE COMMUNITY.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
YEAH I'M NOT GOING TOO FAR AWAY
THIS IS A GREAT CITY AND THE
COMMISSION THE STAFF TEAM
THAT'S A GREAT PLATFORM LEARNED
A WHOLE LOT FROM THIS
OPPORTUNITY
OF THE LAST NINE OR
TEN MONTHS.
SO MUCH APPRECIATE IT.
I'LL MISS YOU GUYS.
>> THANKS SO QUICKLY.
SOME AGENDA ITEMS IN THE FUTURE
.
I'LL LET YOU RUN THROUGH THOSE
AS PER THE IN ADDITION TO THE
ONES WE COVERED TODAY ON THE
BIKE LANE, ENFORCEMENT WILL
COME BACK AND WE'LL TALK ABOUT
TIER ONE, THE TIER TWO LOCATION
UPDATE.
SO THAT IS THE LIVING PART
OF OUR TRANSITION PLAN.
SO EVERY TWO YEARS WE UPDATE
TIER ONE TIER TWO CRASH
LOCATIONS.
WE TOUCHED UPON PACKER STREET
PROJECT UPDATE, NORTHEASTERN
UNIVERSITY AVENUE UPDATE THERE
BE ALSO SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM UPDATES.
SO OUR SUBCOMMITTEE HAS BEEN
WORKING ON THAT.
THERE WILL BE A SLIGHT SETBACK
FOR OVER A COUPLE OF WEEKS AS
WE TRANSITION TO CYNTHIA TO
LEAD THAT EFFORT.
THE LAST ONE IS RAILROAD QUIET
ZONE STUDY SO STAFF WILL
CONTINUE TO COORDINATE WITH THE
UNIVERSITY WAS THERE IS A CLEAR
RECOMMENDATION AS TO THE SCOPE
AND DESIGN WE'LL BRING IS TO
THE COMMISSION TO PRESENT THE
DETAILS.
SO THAT'S THE ITEMS WE HAVE SO
FAR.
RIGHT.
AND AS ALWAYS, IF YOU HAVE ANY
IDEAS OR AGENDA TOPICS PLEASE
EMAIL THEM ALONG.
THAT'S IT'S ALWAYS HELPFUL TO
ADD TO THE LIST.
ALL RIGHT.
WITH THAT THE NEXT MEETING WILL
BE ON WEDNESDAY.
THE TWENTY FIRST TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE AT SEVEN P.M. WILL ALSO BE
A VIRTUAL MEETING AND IF THERE
ARE NO OBJECTIONS DURING THIS
APRIL 16TH MEETING SAYING NO
OBJECTIONS, THIS MEETING IS
ADJOURNED.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT AND THANKS
AGAIN.
OH GOOD LOOK